This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google" books 

http://books.google.com 




The Ramayana 



Valmlki, 

Manmatha Nath 
Dutt 



Digitized by v^.ooQle 



1 "> 

tbv 



Digitized by Google 




Digitized by LjOOQ le 




Digitized by LjOOQ le 




THE 



Wo\.\ 



\ cv r t * 



; RAMAYANA. 



Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 



Tt AT.ATT A ~NT> A TVf ■ 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY l : 

MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A. 

Rector, Keshub Academy. 



PRINTED BY 

Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 

Peva Press, 65/2, Beadon Street. 

CALCUTTA. 



[All rights reserved .] 



FOR THE COMPLETE SET, IN ADVANCE. INCLUDING POSTAGE. 
In India Rt. 16. In Europe £ 2 . 



y Google 




* 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




~\o\\* AoX <- 



n - 

V DXUq 

-i 'Ai C t*s.\ - H-o^ 



THE RAMAYANA IN AN ENGLISH GARB* 



The immortal Epic of Valmiki is undoubtedly one of the gems of 
literature, — indeed, some considering it as the Kohinur of the literary 
region, which has for centuries, and from a time reaching to the dim and 
far past been shedding unparalleled and undying halo upon the domain 
presided over by“the vision and the faculty divine.”The burthen of the 
I bard’s song is the perpetual contest between good and evil, that is every- 
where going on in this mysteriously-ordered world of ours, and which 
seemingly sometimes ending in the victory of the former, and at others 
in that of the latter, vitally and spiritually results in the utter overthrow 
and confusion of evil and in the triumph and final conquest of good. 
Rama sprung from the bright loins of the effulgent luminary of day, 
and bringing his life and being from a long and illustrious ancestry of 
sovereigns, Rama taking birth among the sons of men for chastis- 
ing and repressing rampant Iniquity and Injustice, typifies the 
spirit of good that obtains in this world, — Ravana, that grim and 
terrible Ten-headed one, a Rakshasa by virtue of birth, and worthy 
to be the chief and foremost of Rakshasas by virtue of his many mis- 
deeds and impieties, who challenges and keeps in awe the whole 
host of the celestials — “to whom the Sun did not shine too hot, and 
about whom the Wind did not dare to breathe,” represents the spirit 
of unrighteousness and evil. Lakshmana, disregrading the pomp and 
splendours of princely life, to follow his beloved brother Rama into 
the forest, and cheerfully undergoing there a world of trials and 
privations, and daily and nightly keeping watch and ward 
over his brother and his spouse in their cottage, — and Bharata, 
stoutly and persistently declining, despite the exhortations of 
the elders and the spiritual guides, to govern the kingdom during 
' Rama’s absence in the forest, and holding the royal umbrella over his 



i 



# 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



11 



brother's sandals, are personations of the ne plus ultra of fraternal love, 
and consummate and perfect ideals of their kind. The righteous 
Bibhishana, who for Rama's cause forsook his royal brother, and set 
small store by the splendours of royalty, who suffered no earthly 
considerations to interfere with his entire and absolute devotion to 
his friend, embodies in his person the sterling virtues going 
under the precious name of friendship. The ever-devoted Hanumana 
glorying in the appellation of Rama's servant, — ever-prompt at the 
beck and call of his master to lay down his life — is the grandest and 
loftiest conception of the faithful servant that is to be found in all 
literature. Shall we say aught of Rama and Sita, or keep silence 
over themes too sacred for babblement and frofane mouthing ? 
The kingdom is astir and alive with the jubilations of the populace 
at the prospect of Rama’s coronation ; pennons by thousands are 
streaming like meteors in the air at the tops of stately edifices ; 
and drums and panavas and other musical instruments are sound- 
ing forth the auspicious anouncement. The royal household 
swims in a sea of bliss surging and heaving on all sides. Delight 
and Joy move about and laugh and talk under the names of Daca- 
ratha and Kaucalya. Anon a thunder-clap bursts in the midst of the 
Merry-making, and converts delight into dole, the sounds of laughter 
and hilarity into loud wails and lamentations issuing from hearts 
knowing no consolation. All is lost 1 Rama is to be banished into 
the woods for fourteen years. He cheerfully makes up his mind and 
repairs to the forest in consonance with his father’s promise. Sita 
steps forth — a divinity clad in flesh — Sita would follow the fortunes 
of her lord. She considers it as the height of undutifulness to remain 
behind, continuing to enjoy the pleasures of the palace, while her 
beloved Rama is leading a life of toils and privations in the remote 
woods. The daughter as well as the daughter-in-law of kings, 
brought up in the lap of luxury and amidst the soft ministrations 
of those pleasures that pertain to a royal household, Sita, the idol of 
every one's love and regard, boldly and with alacrity faces all the 
toils and terrors of a forest-life, in preferance to remaining in 
Dacaratha's residence, bereft of the company of her sweet lord. 

All these and various other characters that figure on the fascin- 
ating and enchanting boards of Valmiki, have been developed 



* 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




fully and elaborately, and with and perfect consistency of 
portraiture through the length of his gigantic poem of Rama- 
yana. Ravana standing before us in stupendous proportions as the 
personation of terror and wrong-doing, before whom the human 
spirit trembles as Sita in the Asoka wood; the lotus-eyed 
Rama self-forgetful and heroic, and possessed of the highest 
perfections that can adorn humanity, and through the extremes of 
misery and misfortune ever abiding by righteousness and truth; Sita 
the best and fairest of her sex, the embodiment of all loveliness and 
grace physical and mental, she who rose from the sacrificial fire of 
inspiration — a goddess in all her manifold perfections and unsurpassed 
exellences, whose name carries in the very mention a world of pathos ; 
the faithful Lakshmana, aye cleaving to his brother on the perilous 
edge of raging battle, and in the dreary forest leading a life lorn 
and desolate, — these and others whom we forbear reluctantly to 
name, have been pourtrayed to the life ; they are quick with the Prome- 
thean spark and occupy prominent positions in that ideal world 
brought into being by those mighty intellectual wizards — the poets ; 
and are the perennial fountains of our joy and sorrow, never suffering 
the good and the beautiful to degenerate into cant and commonplace 
in our minds. Oh ! the privilege of genius. 

The influence exercised by the Ramayana upon the Hindus reach- 
ing down to the lowest strata of the society, is literally and in actual 
fact immense. Truly of the Ramayana it can be said in Baconian 
language that it has come home to the business and bosoms of all 
men. If there is one test which more than another distinguishes the 
true from the false in Art, it is the circumstance of a work in- 
fluencing or not influencing life : a work that assimilates itself 
with the mental constitution of a nation, lending energy to impulse, 
contributing to clearness of thought, and ennobling and spiritualis- 
ing the higher emotions and aspirations, must by the very 
reason of its doing so, be true; while that which fails in doing 
so, is not the real and genuine thing and can well be spared. 
The Ramayana has become a household- word in Hindu Society, 
and expressions embodying the memories of incidents celebrated 
in the epic, pass current amongst all ranks of the people, being 
mouthed alike by high and low, by prince and peasantry the aristocracy 



9 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



IV 



and the nobility of the land, by merchants and mechanics, by cultiva- 
tors ploughing the field, and by shepherds keeping the flock, by 
princesses and high-born dames in towering edifices, and the women 
of the peasantry plying their daily tasks, religionists and politicians 
and men of letters, — in short by the community universally. Such 
absolute and all-commanding and comprehensive sway and influence 
of literature is perhaps unknown in the West, with the single excep- 
tion of the Bible. Rama's regime embodies the popular conception 
of administrative perfection — the ideal of a monarchy. Ravana is 
remembered not only in consequence of the prominent part he 
plays in the Ramayana, but also on account of his famous advice to 
Rama immediately before his death, — namely that the execution of 
evil projects should be deferred, but that good ones should be prompt- 
ly executed, — a very sage counsel doubtless, answering partially to 
Macbeth’s observation on hearing of Macduff’s escape : 

“ From this moment 

The very firstlings of my heart shall be 
The firstlings of my hand ” 

“The vow concerning the bow-breaking,” applied sarcastically 
to a case of contumacy, “The war between Rama and Ravana is 
matched by that war alone,” “Ravana’s family,” “Ravana hath 
been ruined by domestic disclosure,” “Lankg, hath met with des- 
truction in consequence of excess of pride,” “That won’t render the 
Ramayana incorrect, 1 ’ — these are some of the adages universally 
current in Hindu society, mixing constantly into common talk. 
Does not this unequivocally and unmistakably prove that the influence 
of Valmiki has entered into the pith and marrow of the nation, and 
vitally sways its intellectual and emotional tendencies ? 

Sita has become the grand exemplar to Hindu women as the 
embodiment of purity, chastity, and wifely fidelity. She has furnished 
Hindu ladies with the highest and noblest conception of their duties 
in their various and manifold relations in life. Her empire is 
both wide and deep over the hearts of her sex, performing for their 
eternal behoof spiritual services of incalculable worth. She should 
be looked upon as one of the greatest teachers of her kind — as a 
teacher in that highest and best sense in which Christ and Chaitanya, 
Nanafc and Socrates are called teachers. Ah, who can say how 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




V 



many women have turned away in the budding prime of youth from 
(he primrose path of dalliance, and have in preferance followed 
[Virtue, who alone is truly fair, — how many stirred and influenced 
by the example of her matchless self-sacrifice have firmly made up 
their minds to tread in her foot-steps ? In like manner it may be 
Raid of almost all the principal characters of the Ramayana, that they 
have more or less deeply influenced the thoughts and sentiments of 
| l :he people. 

Further, the Ramayana has been all along a reservoir upon 
which subsequent writers have drawn ceaselessly. Indeed most of 
^ the succeeding poems owe to the Mahabharata and the Ramayana 
j Tor their subjects. Not to mention writers of less note, even 
Kalidasa’s self has dunk deep of that fountain. Bhababhuti not 
less celebrated has composed a poem treating of the latter part of 
i Rama’s life and saturated with a pathos which perhaps no other pen 
| has surpassed. 

To the antiquary and the student of oriental literature and 
f manners, a knowledge of the Ramayana is simply indispensable. 

» Together with the Mahabharata with which it is joined in popular 
variance, and with which it goes hand in hand in compass and 
I variety of information, but to which its superiority is pronounced in 
ipoint of epic excellence &nd consistency and uniformity of execu- 

i ion, the Ramayana constitutes the great repository of wisdom and 
earning, the manners and customs of the ancient Hindus. Indeed, 
he adage current in our socity with regard to the Mahabharata, “What 
( s not in Bharat (Mahabharat), is not in Bharat (India)” applies to 
he Ramayana as well. In it, cosmogony and theogony, the genealo- 
r jies of kings and princes,— of human and extra-human beings, 
ijpf Ashuras and Danavas , of Jakshas and Gandharvas, and Shtddhas 
1 and Charanas ; folklore and anecdotes and legends, and stories half- 
mythical and half-historical ; descriptions of cities existing at a 
j period long anterior to the age of Troy and Memphis, and the 
:hronicles of kings that reigned before Priam and Busiris, — all these 
j with others too numerous to enumerate, have been woven into the 
( mighty web and woof of the magic drapery evolved by the so potent 
I art of Valmiki. 

Nor is the poem less interesting in a political point qf view. It 



Digitized by Google 



vi 



can hardly be questioned that all progress to be real and intrinsic 
must be developed out of the inherent tendencies of a nation — the 
feelings and sentiments and idiosyncracies into which it is bom as 
well as those which have been stamped on its life and mind by the 
stress and exigencies of circumstances, social and political. For 
a nation, therefore, to govern another with such an object as tha^ 
with which England has taken upon herself the Government of this 
country — namely, the progress and advancement of the childrer 
of the soil — a close and wide study of its laws, and institutions 
manners and customs, modes of thought and emotional proclivities, 
becomes a thing of paramount interest. It is clear, hence, that to out 
rulers an acquaintance with such works as the Mahabharata and the 
Ramayana is most important for wise and beneficient adminstration 
Nor can it avail one to advance the seemingly unanswerable objection 
that treating of as they do a state of society divided from the real 
present by a huge and abyssmal gulf of time, such works can by no 
means serve as useful and faithful guides to the life and manners ol 
Hindu society existing at this day. “In India," as Professor Moniei 
Williams justly remarks, “the lapse of centuries is powerfuless ir 
effecting radical changes in the foundation and constitution of Hindi 
society." The conservative character of the Hindu nation is proverbial! 
In India usages and observances, the rituals prescribed by the script 
tures and the customs sanctioned by hoary age, are clung to with 2 
tenacity that is proof against time and innovation ; and those who thinl 
that England has materially swayed and influnced the social life of th< 
people, labour, we make bold to say, under a lamentable delusion. 

Having regard alike to the surpassing and matchless excellenc 
of the poem itself both in its dramatic and lyric character, ib 
extreme interest it possesses for antiquaries and students of orienta 
literature, and the importance with which its study is fraught politi 
cally to Englishmen, it is most desirable that the Ramayana shouh 
be presented before the public in an English garb. In consequenci 
of its being composed originally in Sanskrit, it literally remains 
sealed book to the majority of students. Few are the persons tha 
can devote their time and energies to master Sanskrit — a languag 
which of all languages existing on earth, is, in consequence of if 
highly complex and complicated grammar, as well as the indefinitenes 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




VII 



hich characterises it on account of its possessing countless 
^synonyms, most difficult to master by a foreigner. Nay, we can per- 
haps safely go so far as to assert that very few amongst those Western 
scholars who have devoted their lives to the study of Sanskrit litera- 
ture, have been able to enter into the spirit of that part of its voca- 
bulary in which are couched those peculiarly Hindu ideas and senti- 
i xnents that constitute the unique genius of the people. To translate, 
^therefore, such a work as the Ramayana from the dead and indefinite 
I Sanskrit into the living and real English, is, like unearthening a fossil 
land inspiring it with life ; or rather like transferring a light from a 
bushel in which it has been hidden, to a mountain- top, — so that men 
I may behold it and the surrounding objects by help of its grateful rays. 

| Surely, to render a work from a dead tongue into a living language 
| and specially such a language as English with all its resources, is 
literally taking it from its narrow and circumscribed sphere of 
influence, and placing it before the world at large — in fact, making it 
the common property and heritage of all mankind. The utility, 
| therefore, we flatter ourselves, of this present literary undertaking, 
will recomend itself to all thinking-minds without any further elabora- 
tion on our part. Indeed, it would argue no common hardihood 
in him who despite common sense and reason, would endevour to 
j maintain that the Epic of Valmiki published in an English garb 
| (always provided that the execution do not fall far short of the 

( requirements) would prove valueless as a contribution to the case of 
literature and culture. 

In translating the Ramayana into English, we are concerned 
with a work composed by an illustrious ascetic passing his days 
in a hermitage in devout contemplation and the practice of rigid 
austerities and self-denial. It behoves us, therefore, to approach the 
task in a becoming spirit, with minds duly prepared and fitted. Let 
us, accordingly, begin by invoking Him whose presence can convert 
the foulest and the most unclean spot, pure and clean, “like the iccicle 
that hangs on Dian’s temple/ 1 or the hearts and aspirations of the 
Vestal Virgins, or pious saints ever engaged in meditating the Most 
High. .May He in His infinite and eternal grace vouchsafe to 
purge our minds of all ignoble feelings and motives, — may He enable 
us to find delight in duty and doing His will ! May our energies 



Digitized by 



Google 




vm 



never flag while carrying the burden we have taken on our shoulders 1 
May He enlighten our understanding to interpret aright and conveJ 
in clear and adequate language the great thoughts and sentiments of 
the sublime bard, — so that the English Ramayana being read by all 
the subjects of a Monarch on whose dominions the sun never sets, it 
may contribute to their constant profit and delight. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



t 

! 

t 



RAMAYANA. 



BALAKANDAM. 



SECTION I. 



I ~~ 

The ascetic Vilmiki asked that best of sages and fore- 
I most of those conversant with words, ever engaged in austeri- 
ties and Vaidika studies, N&rada saying, — “Who at present 
( in this world is alike crowned with qualities, and endued with 
I prowess, knowing duty, and grateful, and truthful, and firm in 
vow, -who is qualified by virtue of his character, and who is ever 
studious of the welfare of all creatures ? Who is learned, hath 
studied society, and knoweth the art of pleasing his subjects ? 
And who alone is ever lovely to hehold ? Who hath subdued his 
heart, and controlled his anger, is endowed with personal grace, 
and devoid of malice ; and whom, enraged in battle, do even 
the gods, fear ? Great is my curiosity to hear of such a person. 
Thou canst,0 Maharshi ,' * tell me of a man of this description.” 
Hearing Vllmiki's words, NSLrada, cognizant of the three 
worlds, said with alacrity, — “Do thou listen ! Rare as are the 
qualities mentioned by thee, I will, O sage, having duly con- 
sidered, describe unto thee a person endued with them. 

| There is one sprung from the line of IkshwSku, known by the 
name of RSma. He is of subdued soul and exceeding prow- 

, * Lit, a great saint. The word, however, signifies one belonging to a parti - 

| cular order of saints. — T. 



% f 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 






* 



RlMlYANA. 



ess ; effulgent ; endowed with patience ; having senses under ! 
control ; intelligent; learned in morality ; eloquent ; crowr ed ( 
with grace ; the slayer of foes ; broad-shouldered ; possessed ] 
of mighty arms, a conch-shaped neck, fleshy jaws, and a | 
broad chest ; a powerful bowman ; the repressor of foes ; 
having plump shoulder-blades ; of arms reaching down unto ] 
his knees ; with a beautiful head,and a graceful forehead ; and j 
endowed with excellent might; having symmetrical limbs ; and I 
of a cool hue ; and possessed of prowess ; and having a well- 
developed chest ; with expansive eyes ; crowned with auspici- ' 
ousness and favourable marks; knowing duty ; firm in promise ; j 
aye engaged in the good of his subjects ; of accomplished re- 
nown ; furnished with knowledge ; pure in body and spirit ; , 
modest towards superiors ; versed in self-knowledge ; like ' 
unto Prajipati himself ; blest with prosperity ; protecting all ; 
the destroyer of enemies, and supporter of all living beings ; ! 
and the stay of order,practising all the duties of his class; and 
preserving those cleaving unto him ; versed in the profundities 
of the Vedas and the Vedlngas ; accomplished in archery ; 
gifted with a good memory ; ascertaining with rapidity 
the truth of things ; the darling of all ; unreproved ; of i 
unvanquished spirit ; discerning ; proficient in every branch 
of learning ; ever resorted to by the good even as the 
ocean is, by the rivers ; worthy of being honored ; having 
an equal regard for all ; and capable of filling the heart with , 
ever-new sensations. Crowned with every grace ; he enhan- 
ceth the joys of Kau9aly& ; being like unto the sea in gravity, 
and unto the Himavat in patience. In prowess, he is like unto 
Vishnu, and boasteth of the personal attractions of the Moon. 

In anger he resembleth the fire raging at the dissolution of 
all ; and in forgiveness, he is like unto the Earth. In giving 
away, he is like unto (Kuvera) the Bestower of riches, and in 
truth, he is like another Dharma. 

“Desirous of doing that which would be acceptable to his 
subject, king Ua9aratha, from fulness of affection, wished to 



Digitized by CjOOQle 



r BlLAKlNDAM. 



3 



instal as his associate in the kingdom his beloved and 
meritorious eldest son, Rama, of infallible prowess, and 
endued with sterling virtues, and ever intent on the welfare 
of the people. Beholding the provisions for the installation, 
that lady the king’s consort, Kaikeyi, who had previously been 
promised two boons, even asked for these, viz., the exile of 
Rama, and the installation of Bharata. Bound by the ties of 
duty in consequence of that promise of his, king Da^aratha 
banished his favorite son Rama. In pursuance of his father's 
promise, and with the view of compassing the pleasure of 
Kaikeyi, that heroic one, commanded by his sire, wended into 
the forest. And on the eve of his departure for the forest, 
that enhancer of Sumitra’s joy and favorite of his brother 
(Rama), his dear brother Lakshmana, endowed with humility, 
displaying brotherliness, followed him out of affection. And 
as Rohini followeth the moon, Raima’s beloved spouse, sprung 
in Janaka’s line — like unto an embodiment of Divine power — 
dear (unto Rama) as life itself, and engaged in acts of 
good, and furnished with every auspicious mark, and the best 
of wives, followed Rama. Having been followed far by 
his father Dayaratha along with the citizens, Rama met with 
the virtuous and beloved king of the Nishadas ; and then in 
company with Guha, Lakshmana, and Sita, dismissed his chari- 
oteer on the banks of the Ganges at Sringaverapura. Then 
wending from one wood to another, and having crossed many 
broad rivers, they, in accordance with Bharadw&ja’s directions, 
arrived at the Chitrakuta ; and constructing a romantic abode, 
the three began to live there as they listed. And they spent their 
days in delight, even like gods and Gandharbhas. And when 
' Rama had reached the Chitrakuta, king Da^aratha, distressed 
| on account of his son, went to heaven, bewailing the latter. 

| And when Da^aratha had ascended heaven, the mighty 
Bharata, although pressed by the Brahmanas headed by Vasis- 
tha, to rule the kingdom, did not wish for dominion. And that 
. hero went after Rama into the forest, with the view of pro- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




4 



RXMXY ANA. 



pitiating that worshipful one. And having come to the high- j 
souled R3ma, with truth for his prowess, he besought his [ 
brother, with every mark of respect. And Rlma said unto 
Bharata these words, — “Thou too, O thou conversant with 
duty, art king.” And the exceedingly generous, illustrious and 
mighty R&ma of a cheerful countenance did not wish for the 
kingdom, in consonance with his father’s injunction. And hav- 
ing made over unto Bharata, as his substitute on the throne, 
his own sandals, Bharata’s elder brother repeatedly forbade 
him. And then Bharata, finding his desire not obtained, touch- 
ed Rama’s feet, and began to rule at NandigrSma, expecting 
the return of Rama. And when the auspicious Bharata, 
firm in promise and of subdued sense, had gone away, Rama 
again perceiving there the influx of citizens and others, eagerly 
entered Dandaka. And having entered that mighty forest, 
the lotus-eyed Rama slew the Rakshasa, Viradha, and saw 
Sarabhanga, Suitikshna, Agastya and Agastya’ s brother. And 
he then, directed by Agastya, gladly possessed himself of 
Indra’s bow, the inexhaustible arrows, the scimitar, and the 
quiver. And while Rama was dwelling there with the rangers 
of woods, the sages came to him in a body for the destruction 
of the Asuras and Rakshasas. Thereupon in the presence 
of those ascetics like unto flaming fire, inhabiting the 
Dandaka forest, he promised to slay those Rakshasas in 
battle. And it was while he was living there that, that 
dweller of Janasthana, the Rakshasi Surpanakha, capable of 
assuming any form at will, was disfigured. And it was 
while living there in the society of the inhabitants of Janas- 
thana, that Rama slew in battle the Rakshasas Khara and j 
Tri^ira and Dushana, together with their followers, who 
all had been stirred up by the words of Surpanakha. And 
fourteen thousand Rakshasas were slain in that battle. And ] 
learning of the destruction of his relatives, Ravana wrought 
into frenzy by anger, sought the aid of a Rakshasa named ! 
Maricha. And although strongly dissuaded by Maricha, saying , 



I 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



BlLAKlNDAM . 



5 



“Thou ought not to enter into hostilities with that powerful 
one. Do thou, therefore, O RSvana, excuse me !” Yet, dis- 
regarding those words of his, R&vana, urged on by Fate, went 
into that asylum in company with Maricha. And that one 
(Maricha) commanding illusions, having drawn far the king's 
sons (Rama and Lakshmana\ he (Ravana) carried away Rama’s 
wife, slaying the vulture Jat&vu. And beholding the vulture 
slain and learning of the carrying off of Mithiia’s daughter, 
the descendant of Raghu, deprived of sense, bewailed in grief. 
And having with unassuaged sorrow burnt the vulture JatSyu, 
as he was searching for Sita in that wood, he fell in with a 
Rakshasa, K&vandha by name, of a dreadful and deformed 
shape. Having slain him, the mighty-armed one burnt his 
body, — and thereupon he went to heaven. And the Rakshasa 
addressed Rama, saying, “Do thou, O descendant of Raghu, re- 
pair unto the female ascetic, Savari, conversant with all systems 
of morality.” Reparing to Savari, that destroyer of foes, gifted 
with exceeding energy, Rama, the son of Da^aratha, highly 
honored by Savari, met with Hanuman on the banks of the 
Pampa. Then, agreeably to Hanuman’s advice, the exceed- 
ingly powerful Rama saw Sugriva and detailed unto him all, 
specially touching Sita. Then the monkey Sugriva, having 
heard all from Rama, was well pleased with Rama and in the 
presence of fire, made friends with him. Then the king of mon- 
keys, out of friendship, mournfully related unto him all about 
his hostilities with Vali. And then Rama vowed that he would 
slay Vali. Thereupon the monkey described unto Raghava 
the prowess of Vali, and he feared lest Rama should not prove 
a match for Vali. And with the view of convincing Raghava 
(as to Vali's might), Sugriva showed unto him the huge corpse 
of Dundabhi, resembling a large hill. And looking at the skele- 
ton, Rama endued with exceeding prowess, smiling the 

I while, with his toe cast it off at the distance of full ninety 
miles. And with a single mighty shaft he pierced seven 
palmyra palms, a hill, and the sixth nether world, carrying 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




6 



RlMlVANA. 



conviction into Sugriva. Thus convinced, the mighty monke 3 
well pleased went with Rama towards the cave callec 
Kishkindi. And having arrived there, that best of monkeys | 
Sugriva of a tawney and golden hue, set up loud roarsj 
And at those mighty sounds, out came the lord of monkeys j 
and having obtained Tara’s consent, came before Sugriva 
for battle. Then RSghava killed Vali on the spot with z 
.single shaft. And, in compliance with Sugriva's request 
having slain Vali in battle, Raghava conferred the kingdom 
on Sugriva. Then that best of monkeys having summoned 
all the various monkeys, sent them in various directions in 
search of Janaka’s daughter. Then at the suggestion of the 
vulture Samp&ti, the mighty Hanum&n crossed the salt sea ex- 
tending for a hundred yojanas . And arriving at the city of 
Lanka, ruled by R5vana, he found Sita in the midst of an Aso- 
ka wood, absorbed in thought. And then having shown her 
the sign, he related unto her all about the friendship between 
R^ma and Sugriva, and having cheered Videha’s daughter, he 
smashed the gate of the palace. Then having slain five gener- 
als, and seven counsellors’ sons, and grinded the heroic, Aksha, 
he was bound fast (by the arms of Indrajit). Then knowing] 
that in virtue of the grand-sire*s boon, he was free, he forgave 
those Rakshasas that were leading him (to Ravana). Then 
having burnt down the city of Lanka, with the exception of 
the place occupied by Mithila’s daughter, the mighty one 
returned, with the intention of delivering the glad tidings unto 
Rama. And that one of immeasurable soul having come be- 
fore the high souled Rama, and circled him, addressed him, 
saying, — “I have truly seen Sita.” Then accopanied by 
Sugriva, Rama repaired to the shore of the mighty ocean, and 
with shafts resembling the sun, vexed the deep. Then that! 
lord of rivers — the Ocean — showed himself. And agreeably! 
to the advice of the Ocean, Nala constructed a bridge (over, 
the water). By that bridge Rama went to the city of 
Lanka, — and slew Ravana in battle. And having recovered j 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bXlakXndam. 



7 



JitSL, Rlma experienced high shame (\n consequence of 
5it3k’s having lived so long in Ravana’s place), and used harsh 
anguage towards SitS in the presence of all. Incapable of 
>earing it, the chaste SitS. entered flaming fire. Thereupon 
assured by Agni as to the sinlessness of Sit«L, Rama became 
exceedingly pleased, and was honored by all the deities. 
And at the great act of Rama’s, the three worlds with all 
that was mobile and immobile in them, as well as the sages 
and gods, were well pleased with the mighty-souled Raghava. 
Then installing that foremost of R&kshasas, Bibhisana, on 
the throne of LankSL, Rama was perfectly easy, and re- 
joiced exceedingly. Then R&ma, obtaining a boon from the 
celestials, revived the monkeys fallen in battle, and surround- 
ed by friends, set out for Ayodhya on the car Pushpaka. 
And repairing to Bharadw&ja’s hermitage, R§ma, having 
truth for his prowess, despatched Hanuman to Bharata. 
Then talking over past affairs, accompanied with Sugriva, 
Rama, mounted on the Pushpaka, departed for Nandigr&ma. 
Having arrived at Nandigrima, the sinless Rama sheared 
himself of his matted locks along with his brothers, and, 
having regained Sita, got back his kingdom. And Da9aratha’s 
son, the auspicious R&ma, lord of AyodhS, hath been ruling 
those happy subjects of his, even like a father. (During his 
reign) his subjects will enjoy happiness, and contentment, 
and become hale, and grow in righteousness, and be devoid of 
mental disquietude and disease, and free from the fear of 
famine. And no person is to witness his son’s death, and 
women will be ever chaste, and never bear widowhood. And 
no fear of conflagration (will exercise people), nor creatures 
be drowned in water. And no danger will come from the wind, 
' — nor any suffer from fever. And no fear will come from hunger, 
lor from thieves. And cities and provinces will be filled with 
Corn and wealth. And all will live happily as at the Golden age, 
^nd having performed with countless gold an hundred 
htprse sacrifices, and bestowed with due rites ayutas and 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




8 



JtiMll'A.VA. 



koits * of kine on learned persons, and countless wealth on 
famous Brahmanas, R&ghava will establish an hundred roya 
families, and will employ each of the four castes in its owr 
duties. And having reigned for ten thousand and'as man) 
hundred years, Rlma will depart for the regions of Brahma 
He that readeth this sacred, sin-destroying, merit-bestowing 
history of RSma like unto the Veda itself, becometh cleansed 
from all sin. And the man that readeth this R£m&yana 
conferring length of days, after death, is honored in heaven, 
along with his sons, and grandsons, and relations. If a 
Br&hmana readeth it, he attaineth excellence in speech ; if a 
Kshatriya, he acquireth lordship over landed possessions ; 
if a Vaisya, abundance of wealth in trade ; and if a Sudra, 
greatness.” 



SECTION II. 



Hearing those words of Narada, that one of virtuous 
soul, skilled in speech, together with his disciples, worshipped 
that mighty sage And having received due honors, that 
celestial asking for and receiving permission (to depart), 
went to the etherial regions. And when Narada had left 
for the celestial regions, that holy person went to the banks 
of the Tamasa hard by the Jahnavi. And having arrived 
at the banks of that river, the pious one, observing j 
holy spot devoid of mud, spoke into his disciple standing by. 
saying, — “O Bharadwaya, behold this holy spot devoid 
mud. And it is beautiful, and contains pleasant waters, even 

♦ Ayuta is ten thousand ; and koti is ten millions.— 7*. | 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKlNDAM \ 



9 



Jike the minds of good men. Do thou, O child, put down thy 
pitcher, and give me my bark. I will bathe even in this 
amas&, the best of holy spots.” Thus accosted by the high- 
souled VSlmiki, Bharadwaja ever intent upon serving his 
spiritual guide, presented the sage his bark. And that one 
of subdued senses, having received his bark from his disciple, 
began to range around, surveying that extensive forest. In 
the vicinity of the wood, that worshipful one espied a pair of 
Kraunchas, emitting melodious notes, and ranging around in 
perfect peace of mind. At this juncture, a wicked-minded 
fowler, singling out the male without any cause of 
hostility, slew him in the very presence of the holy man. And 
observing him struggling on the earth, bathed in blood his 
help-mate began to bewail in piteous accents, at the prospect 
of her separation from her copper-crested oviparous husband, 
engaged in sport with extended plumage. Finding the 
oviparous one thus brought down by the fowler, the piety 
of that pious and righteous-souled Rishi was excited exceed- 
ingly. Then considering it to be an unrighteous deed, with 
a heart moved with pity, that twice-born one, beholding 
the weeping Kraunchi, spoke these words , — “O fowler, 
since thou hast slain one of a pair of Kraunchas, thou shalt 
never attain prosperity !” Having uttered this, he thought 
within himself, “What is this that I have said, afflicted with 
grief for the bird?" Revolving thus in his mind, that 
highly-wise one and best of sages addressed his disciple, 
saying, — “This speech that I have uttered is of equal feet 
and accents; and is capable of being chaunted accord- 
ing to measure to stringed accompaniment. Let it there- 
fore go forth as a sloka as it has come out of my sorrow \” 
When the sage had spoken thus, his disciple, well pleased, 

f assented to his excellent speech ; and thereat that pious 
person was gratified. Then having duly performed his 

( ablutions at that holy spot, the reverend sage retraced 
his steps, pondering over the incidents touching the sloka 
2 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




IO 



RlMXVANA. 



And his disciple also, accomplished in learning, and o(| 
meek demeanour, followed Valmiki, carrying on his back 
a pitcher filled with water. 

Having entered the hermitage along with his disciple, 
that one knowing duty, while apparently engaged in diverse 
kinds of talk, revolved in his mind the circumstances con- 
nected with the verses. And it came to pass that desirous ] 
of seeing the best of sages, there arrived that lord and 1 
creator ©f all, the effulgent BrahmA, furnished with four 
countenances. Beholding him, Valmiki rose up suddenly 
and, wondering greatly, humbly and silently stood before 
him with folded hands. And duly bending low in rever- 
ence Valmiki offered that deity water to wash his feet, and 1 
other things for reception. And having sat down on a 
highly-honored seat, that worshipful one enquired after the 
welfare of that sage Valmiki knowing no deterioration ; and 
then asked him to be seated. And having been seated in 
the presence of the Grand-sire of all, Valmiki, his mind run- 
ning upon the self-same subject, became plunged in thought 
‘•What a sin hath been committed by that wicked-minded 
one, incited by hostile feeling, when he without cause slew 
that sweetly-singing Kraunchal” And thereupon, again 
lamenting that female Krauncha, he, in grief of heart, 
mentally recited those verses. Then smiling, BrahmA spoke 
unto that excellent sage, — ‘ Those verses of thine which thou 
hast composed shall attain celebrity : no doubt need be enter- 
tained on this head. It is because I had intended so, that 
those verses had come out of thy lips. Do thou now, O 
best of saints, compose the entire history of RAma. Do 
thou relate unto the world the history of the righteous-souled 
and intelligent RAma crowned with qualities. And do thou, 
and thou hast heard it from NArada, relate all that is known, 
and all that is unknown to thee, O wise one, concerning 
RAma, and Lakshmana, and Videha’s daughter, and all the 
RAkshasas. And even what is not known to NArada, shall 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



ir 



be unfolded unto thee. And no words of thine in this poem 
sViall contain an untruth. Do thou, therefore, compose into 
verses this delightful story of Rama. And as long as the 
mountains and the seas exist on earth, thy history of Rama- 
yana will spread among men. And as long as this story of 
Ramlyana shall retain currency, thou shalt reside both in 
this world and in mine/’ Having said this, the worshipful 
Brahma disappeared there. And thereat the sage and his 
disciples marvelled greatly. And his disciples sang those 
verses again and again ; and, momentarily experiencing 
pleasure, said unto him with exceeding wonder, — “Those 
verses, composed of equal accents, and furnished with four 
parts, have been sung by the mighty saint, have, in virtue of 
frequent repetition, been associated with a world of pathos, 
and have attained the eminence of a sloka . And now it is the 
intention of that illustrious and self centered sage to com- 
pose the entire Ram&yana in this metre/ 1 

The great ascetic Valmiki of gracious appearance and 
unparalleled renown has composed hundreds of verses in 
melodious measure, couching the significance of the history 
of Rama’s line. Listen to the annals of the foremost of 
Raghu’s race, and the destruction of the Ten-headed one 
composed by the ascetic, with Samasas, Sandhis , Prakritas , 
and Pratayas\ and lucid with sweet and equally-accented 
words. 



SECTION Ml. 



FT aving heard the entire history of the intelligent 
Rlma, capable of conferring religious merit and the two 
other cognate objects, as well as emancipation, Valmiki again 
sought to get insight into it. And, seating himself facing 
the east on a cushion of kusa grass, and sipping water 



i 



/ 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



12 



R AM A TANA. 



according to the ordinance, he addressed himself to the com 
templation of the subject through yoga. And by virtue o 
his yoga powers, he clearly observed before him Rama, anc 
Lakshmana, and Sita, and Da^aratha together with his wive* 
in his kingdom, laughing, and talking, and acting, and bear- 
ing themselves as in real life. And he saw into all that waa 
endured by RSma firm in promise, with his wife for th« 
third. And like an emblic myrobalan on his palm, thal 
righteous-souled one, by virtue of his yoga , perceived all thal 
had happened as well as all that would happen in future. 
And having truly seen everything by virtue of his con- 
templation, that magnanimous one set about recording the 
charming Rama’s history. And agreeably to what had been 
related by the mighty-souled NSrada, that worshipful saint’ 
composed the history of Ragu’s line, conferring profit and 
pleasure, and impregnated with qualities fraught with them, and, 
like unto the ocean, abounding in riches, and captivating 
ear and mind. And Rama’s birth, and mighty prowess, and 
kindness to all, and popularity, and forbearance, and good- 
ness, and truthfulness, and the wonderful converse he had 
with ViswSLmitra ; and the nuptials of Janaki ; and the snap- 
ping of the bow ; and the hostilities of Rama with Rama 
(Parasur&ma) ; and the noble qualities of Da<?aratha’s son ; 
and Rama’s installation ; and the enmity of Kaikeyi ; and the 
obstacle in the way of the installation ; and the exile of 
Rama ; and the king’s grief, lamentations, and departure for 
the other regions ; and the grief of the subjects, and their dis- 
missal (by Rama to Ajodhyai ; and the tidings of the lord of 
Nishadas ; and the charioteer’s return ; and the crossing 
of the Ganges; and Rama’s interview with Bharadwaja; and his 
arrival at Chitrakuta in consonance with Bharadwaja’s injunc- 
tion ; and Rama’s building a mansion there and sojourn ; and 
Bharata’s arrival, and his propitiation of Rama ; and Rama’s 
offering oblations to the manes of his father ; and the install- 
ation of the sandals ; and Bharata’s dwelling at Nandigrama ; 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



*3 



and Rama’s removal to Dandaka and destruction of Viradha ; 
ind Rama’s interview with Sarabhanga and meeting with 
Sutikshna ;and Sita’s companionship with Anusuya, and the 
latter's painting the former ; and Rama’s interview with 
Agastya, and his obtaining the bow from him ; and the story of 
Surpanakha and her disfigurement; and the slaughter of Khara 
and Tri^ira; and the exertions of Ravana; the destruction of 
Maricha, and the carrying away of Vaidehi ; Raghava’s lamen- 
tations, and the death of the king of vultures; Rama’s 
encounter with Kavandha, (a headless demon) and his view of 
Pampa; Rama’s interview with Savari, and his subsistence 
there on fruits and roots; Rama’s lamentations, at Pampa, and 
meeting with Hanuman ; the former's sojourn to the Rishyamu- 
kha, and interview with Sugriva ; Rama’s raising the confi- 
dence of Sugriva, and his friendship with the latter; and the 
encounter between Vali and Sugriva ; the destruction of Vali, 
and the establishment of Sugriva on the throne; and Tara’s 
lamentation ; the understanding between Rama and Sugriva 
as to the time for commencing the march ; Rama’s stay 
during the rainy season ; and the ire of the lion of Raghu’s 
race ; the levying of forces ; and the despatch of envoys in 
different directions ; and the assignment by Sugriva 
of different quarters to the monkeys; the making over of his 
ring by Rama to Hanuman ; Jambubana’s discovery of the 
cave; the fasting of the monkeys on the shore of the 
ocean; Hanuman’s interview with Sampati ; Hanuman’s 
ascension of the mountain, and his bounding over the main ; 
and his sight of the Mainaka at the injunction of Ocean ; the 
roaring of Rakshasis ; Hanuman’s meeting with the Rakshasa 
ChaySgraha; Hanuman’s destruction of Sinhikaya ; and 
Hanuman’s sight of Lanka, and his entrance by night into 
Lanka; his ascertaining of conduct in times of helpless- 
ness ; his journey to the tavern ; and his sight of the 
; nner apartments ; and his sight of Ravana and of his car 
Pushpaka;his walk to the Asoka wood, and sight there 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




14 



Rl Mil ANA. 



of Sita; his presentation of the ring to Sit5 and conver 
with her; and the roaring of the Rakshasis; and tl 
dreaming of the dream by TrijatS. ; Sita's handing 
gem to Hanuman ; and the breaking down of trees ; a 
the flight of the Rakshasis, and slaughter of the slave: 
and the wind-god's Son being 1 taken captive ; and his terrib 
roars while burning down Lanka; and his bounding ba< 
over the ocean ; and the forcible possession of honej 
and Hanum&n's consoling RSghava, and handing him t ! 
gem ; Rama's interview with Ocean ; aud Nala's constructs 
the bridge, the army's crossing of the ocean; and 
nightly seige of Lanka ; and Rama's interview \vi: 
Bibhishana; the communication as to the means of destru 
tion ; and the destruction of Kumbhakarna and MeghanSdi 
and the destruction of Ravana, and the recovery of Sita in tb 
enemy's city; and the sprinkling of Bibhishana, and the sig 1 
of Pushpaka; Rama's return towards Ayodhya, and meetia 
with BharadwSja; despatch of HanumSn; and Rama's mee 
ing with Bharata ; and the installation of Rama ; and the d 
missal of all the forces; and Rama's pleasing his subject 
and renunciation of Sita, — all else besides concerning Ran 
on earth, that hath not yet taken place, — have been dea 
with by the worshipful sage in the last book. 



SECTION IV. 

> e mz 

W HEN Rama had obtained his kingdom, that worst* 
ful sage Valmiki, composed the entire history [of that hen 
in excellent metre and fraught with high meaning. Tl 
saint recited twenty-four thousand slokas ; and it consii 
of five hundred sections, and is divided into six Kandas V 
the UttarS. And having composed it, including as well ful 
incidents to happen afterwards, that lord reflected as to vl 
should publish the same before assemblies. And as tl 
great sage of purified soul was thus pondering, in came Kl 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bXlakAndam . 



*5 



^and Lava, in the guise of the sons of ascetics, and touched 
his feet. And he found those illustrious princes, the 
brothers Kusi and Lava, knowing morality, and living in a 
hermitage, and endowed with sweet voices, — apt at taking in 
the meaning of poetry. And finding them of a retentive 
endowment, and initiated into Vedic studies, that lord taught 
them how to interpret the Vedas, and that vow-observing 
one taught them the great R&m&yana in full, treating of 
Sit&’s life, and the destruction of Paulastya. And those 
sweet voiced brothers, resembling Gandharbas in grace, 
accomplished in music and dancing, and cognizant of 
Sthana and Murchhana t began to chaunt this poem delightful 
in recitation and in singing, set in three measures, and seven 
notes, and sung according to time to the accompaniment 
of stringed instruments, and fraught with the sentiments 
of love, pathos, risibility, the irascible, the terrible, and the 
heroic. And knowing the characteristics that go to make 
up the Drama, and gifted with mellifluous voices, those 
blameless princes, coming from RSma’s body, and resembling 
him, even as the reflection of the solar or the lunar disc 
resembles that disc, got by heart that excellent and moral 
story in its entirety ; and those princes versed in the Fine 
arts, with a concentrated mind chaunttd it as they had 
learnt it, in the assemblies of ascetics and Br&hmanas and 
good men. 

v Once upon a time, those highsouled and pious ones, 
furnished with every auspicious mark, chaunted this poem 
in an assembly of ascetics of purified souls. Having heard 
' ' this music, all the ascetics were seized with surprise, and 
\ with eyes flooded with tears, exclaimed, “Well done! Well 
5 done |” And well pleased, those saints cherishing Duty, 
praised the praiseworthy Kusa and Lava as they sang, 

! saying, — “Ah! what charming music! What sweetness of 
^ the verses ! All this happened long ago, yet it seems as 

I if we saw it before us. ,, And unified with the theme, 

r. 



i 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




i6 



RlMArANA. 



both of them singing together sweetly, and at a high pitc 
by means of saraja and the other notes, they entranced t 
audience. And the two thus went On sweetly singing i 
a high pitch, praised by those mighty sages priding in th( 
asceticism. Some one in the assembly pleased with thd 
presented them with a water-pitcher; and some one of hi? 
fame, being delighted, made them a present of a bark garment 
and some one gave them a dark deer skin ; — and some-ho T 
thread, — and some, a kamandalu * and some great sai" 
conferred on them a maunjai made girdle ; and some perse 
granted them a vrishi y % and some, a kaupina- IT And th« 
some ascetic, well-pleased, gave them an axe; and some,; 
red cloth ; and some, a thread for tying up their matted lock* 
and some gladly gave a twine for binding faggots with,- 
and some, ascetic presented them with a sacrificial pot 
and some, a quantity of fire-wood ; and some, a seat mao' 
of adumvari.\ And some exclaimed, “Swasti and son* 
joyfully cried, — “May ye be long-lived !” And all tho* 
ascetics of truthful speech conferred on them blessing^ 
And the sages said, — “Wonderful is the story ! And, 0 « 
accomplished in all kinds of music ! beautifully have y 
chaunted and finished this poem, charming ear and hear 
and conferring long life and prosperty, — which will affor 
themes to poets.” And admired everywhere, on one occasic:! 
those singers were seen by Bharata’s elder brother, in *j 
street of Ayodhya, sparsely scattered with stalls. A-*\ 
having had the brothers Kusa and Lava brought under 
roof, that destroyer of enemies, Rama, accorded those od*| 
worthy of honor, a respectful reception. And having seat* j 
himself on a throne of excellent gold, in the midst oft ] 



* An earthen or wooden water pot used by an ascetic, 
t A kind of grass. 

J The seat of an ascetic. 

If A small piece of cloth worn by ascetics. 

$ The glomerous fig tree. , 

I 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





BlLAKlNDAM. 



17 



brothers and counsellors, that lord, Rama, beholding both 
tbe brothers, handsome and of modest demeanour, spoke 
unto Lakshmana, Bharata and Satrughna, saying, — “Do ye 
listen to the story, fraught with excellent sense and composed 
in excellent measure, as sung by these ones endowed with the 
divine afflatus.” And then he ordered the singers to begin. 
Thereupon causing the down of the audience to stand on end, 
and ravishing their minds and hearts, they began to sing melo- 
diously and distinctly and in as high a pitch as they could com- 
mand, and in strains rivalling the notes of a VinSL And that 
song of theirs enchanted the ear of that assembly. And Rama 
said, — “Although these Kusa and Lava, of rigid penances, 
look like ascetics, yet they bear on their persons the signs 
of royalty. And, besides, the story conduces to my fame. 
Do ye, therefore, listen to that history fraught with great 
worth r And then commanded by Riima, they began to 
chaunt according to the Marga mode, and R&ma seated in 
the midst of his court, was drawn to the music, anxious for 
the perpetuation of his history. 



SECTION V. 



This great story of R&m§yana treats of those victori- 
ous kings commencing with Praj§pati, and having Ikshw&ku 
for their founder, who ruled the entire earth as no other 
kings had done so before them, and in whose line Sagara 
was born — Sagara who dug the ocean, and whom, while out 
in progress, his sixty-thousand sons followed. We shall now 
chaunt the entire history of that dynasty from the beginning. 
Do ye, with minds free from ill will, listen to that story con- 
ferring merit, profit and pleasure. 

There is on the banks of the Sarayu a great and flourish- 
ing country called Kosala abounding in corn and wealth, in 
which the inhabitants passed their days pleasantly. And 

3 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




x8 



RlMlYANA. 



the capital of that country was AyodhyS famed among m<fi 
which was founded by Manu himself — that foremost ft 
men. And that beautiful and mighty city was twelve yoja7t& 
in length and ten in breadth; and was intersected outs i<fc 
with spacious roads laid out orderly. And scattered with 
blown blossoms, and regularly sprinkled with water, the well- 
arranged broad high-ways looked beautiful. And that one 
bringing prosperity unto mighty kingdoms, King Da^aratha, 
lived in that city, like unto the lord of the deities inhabiting 
the celestial regions. And the city was furnished with doors 
and gates, and well-arranged rows of shops. And it con- 
tained all kinds of instruments and arms, and was inhabited 
by all classes of artizans. And that graceful and matchlessly 
brilliant city abounded in eulogists and genealogists. And 
it was crowned with stately edifices with flags, and guarded 
by hundreds of *Sataghnis. And the mighty city contained 
theatres for females, aud gardens, and mango-groves ; and 
was enclosed by a wall. And encircled by a deep moat, the 
city was accessible neither to friend nor foe. And it 
abounded with elephants and horses, and kine and camels 
and asses. And it was thronged with neighbouring kings 
come to pay tribute, and inhabited by merchants from various 
countries, and adorned with mountain-like palaces glitter- 
ing with gems, and filled with sporting-places for females, 
and like unto Indra's Amaravati. And the city was wonder- 
ful to behold, gleaming with gold-burnished ornaments, and 
inhabited by troops of courtezans, and abounding in all 
kinds of gems, and graced with royal places. And it abound- 
ed in paddy and rice, and its water was sweet as the juice of 
the sugar-cane. And it resounded with the sounds of Dun - 
dubhis and Mirdangas and Vinds and Panavas . And that 
foremost spot of all the earth was like unto an aerial car 
obtained in heaven by the Siddhas, through force of ascetic 



• A weapon commonly described as a stone set round with iron 



spikes.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKXNDAM. 



x 9 



austerities, and thronged with the best specimens of humanity. 
And that city was filled by king Da^aratha with thousands 
of such MahSLrathas* light-handed and accomplished in fight, 
as could by force of arms or sharpened shafts slaughter 
infuriated lions and tigers and boars roaming in the forest ; 
yet as would not pierce with arrows persons lorn or abandoned 
or hiding or fugitive. And it abounded mostly in excellent 
Brahmanas, lighting the sacrificial fire, and crowned with 
qualities, and versed in the Vedas and the Ved&ngas, and 
giving away thousands, and ever abiding by truth, and 
high-souled, and resembling mighty ascetic. 

SECTION VI. 

And in that city of Ayodhya resided king Da9aratha 
versed in the Vedas, commanding all resources, far-sighted, of 
mighty prowess, dear to the inhabitants both rural and urban, 
an Athiratha\ in the Ikshw&ku line, performing sacrifices, 
engaged in the performance of duties, self-controled like 
unto a Maharshi , a royal saint famed in the three worlds, 
possessed of strength, the destroyer of foes, having friends, of 
subdued senses, comparable unto Sakra and Vaisravana by 
virtue of accumulated riches and other possessions, and pro- 
tecting people even as the highly energetic Manu protected 
them. And as Indra rules Amaravati, that one firm in pro- 
mise, and following duty, profit, and pleasure, ruled that best 
of cities. And in that excellent city, the men were happy 
and righteous-souled, and widely-read, and each contented 
with his possessions, and devoid of covetuousness, and speak- 
ing the truth. And in that prime of cities, there was none 
who had not at his command a plenteous supply of the good 

* A warrior coping with ten thousand persons, and protecting both his 
charioteer and steeds. — T. 

f A warrior fighting ten thousand Maharathas.—T. 



Digitized by Google 



20 



RlMlFANA. 



things, and there was no householder who was not well cf 
in horses and kine, and corn and wealth. And one could se 
nowhere in AyodhyS persons given up to lust, or unsighth, 
or crooked-minded, or unlettered, or atheistical. And a£ 
the men and all the women were of excellent character, and 
subdued senses and a happy frame of mind, and both in res- 
pect of occupation and conduct spotless like unto Maharshis. 
And all wore ear-rings and tiaras and garlands, and abund- 
antly enjoyed the good things of life. And all were clean, 
daubing their limbs, and perfuming their persons, and feeding 
on pure food, and giving away, and wearing Angadas* 
and Nishkasf and hand-ornaments, and repressing passions. 
And there were not in AyodhyS persons not lighting the 
sacrificial fire, or not performing sacrifices, or mean-minded, 
or thieving, or engaged in improper occupations, or of impure 
descent. And the BrShmanas of subdued senses were always 
engaged in the performance of their own duties, giving away 
in charity, and studying, and receiving gifts with discrimi- 
nation. And none of them was atheistical or untruthful or 
slenderly-read or detracting or incompetent or illiterate. And 
there was no Brahmana who was net versed in the Vedas 
and Ved5ngas, or not observing vows, or not giving away by 
thousands, or poor-spirited, or of insane mind, or afflicted. 
And no man and no woman was seen devoid of grace or 
beauty, or lacking in reverence for their monarch. And the 
four orders with BrShmanas at their head contained persons 
serving gods and guests, and endowed with gratitude, 
and munificent, and heroic, and possessing prowess. And 
the men were long-lived ; and ever abode by duty and 
truth ; and lived in that best of cities, always surrounded 
by sons and grandsons and wives. The Kshatriyas were 
obedient unto the Br§hmanas, and the Valyas followed the 



• A bracelet worn upon the upper arm. — T. 
f An ornament for the breast or nfek. — T 



i 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





BlLAKlNDAM. 



21 



Kshatriyas, and the Sudras, occupied with their proper 
vocations, ministered unto the three other orders. And 
that city was ably governed by that lord of Ikshw5ku’s line, 
even as that foremost of men, the intelligent Manu, had 
governed it before him. And as a mountain-cavern 
abounds with lions, it was filled with warriors resembling 
flaming fire, of straight ways, unforbearing, and of accom- 
plished learning. And the city abounded with excellent 
horses sprung in KSmvoja, and Vahlika, and VanSyu, and 
the banks of the Sindhu, and like unto that best of horse, 
Hari's charge ; and with fierce elephants sprung on the 
Vindha mountain, and the Himavat, filled with juice, and of 
exceeding strength, and resembling hills ; and with Bhadra,* 
Mandra, and Mriga elephants ; and those sprung from the 
mixture of the three, and from the mixture of Bhadra and 
Mandra, and from Bhadra and Mriga, and from Mriga and 
Mandra, — superior like unto Airavata, and coming from 
MahSpadma, Anjana, and V&mana breeds ; fierce, and look- 
ing like hills. And that city was over two yojanas ; 
and truly it was called AyodhyS.f And repressing enemies, 
that city was governed by the great and the exceedingly 
powerful king Da^aratha, even as the Moon sways the stars. 
And that lord of earth resembling Sakra governed that city 
of Ayodhya bearing a true name, furnished with strong gates 
and bolts, and auspicious, and graced with excellent edifices, 
and teeming with thousands. 



* Those elephants whose limbs are contracted are Bhadras ; those whose 
bodies are fat, slack, and contracted are Mandras ; and those whose bodies are 
lean and large are Mrigas. — T. 

f Lit, incapable of being conquered.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




M RlM\YANA. 

section VII. 

■ c i a 

That high-souled one of IkswSku’s line had competes 
counsellors, capable of administering business, of diving inti 
the motives of others, and ever intent upon the good of the 
monarch. And that heroic king had eight famous coun- 
sellors, pure and devoted to the royal service, — vis., Dhrishti 
and Vijaya, and SurSshtra, and Rashtravardhana, an<i 
Akopa, and DharmapSla, and Sumantra the eighth, convers- 
ant with profit. And he had two family priests after his 
heart ; viz, those foremost of saints, Vasistha and V§madevi 
And he had other counsellors besides; viz ., Suyajna,an<i 
J3.v3.li, and Ka^yapa, and Gautama, and the long-lived Mir- 
kandeya, and the regenerate KStyayana. Ever associated 
in counsel with these Brahmarshis, his priests and 
counsellors serving the dynasty from father to son, were 
learned yet modest, and bashful, and conversant with policy, 
and of subdued-senses, and auspicious, and high-souled, and 
accomplished in the art of arms, and of high renown, and 
cautious, and acting according to their word, and possessing 
energy, forgiveness and fame, and ever preluding their 
speech with a smile, and never committing themselves to 
a lie either from anger or interest or desire, and ever 
employing spies noting what was doing or done in the 
midst of their own or a hostile party. And they were adepts 
in intercourse, with people, and well-tried in friendship by 
the monarch. And they were ever busy in replenishing the 
exchequer and in levying troops. And they did not cherish 
ill will even towards enemies, when innocent. And they 
were heroic, and ever high-spirited, following policy, and 
protecting those citizens that were pure, and not bearing 
ill will towards BrShmanas and Kshatriyas, and filling the 
treasury ,by inflicting punishments according to the offences d 
the persons guilty. And during the time when those pure o*» 
of one mind presided over the justice of the kingdom, thp 



Digitized by Google 



l 




BlLAKXNDAM . 



n 



was neither in the city nor the provinces any that was a liar, 
or wicked, or going after others' wives. And peace reigned 
all around the city and the provinces. And the ministers 
wore excellent raiment, and ornaments, and were engaged in 
observing pure vows, and ever kept their eye of policy open, in 
the interests of the monarch. And the king considered 
them as crowned with virtues ; and they were lamed on 
account of their prowess, concluding unerringly in con- 
sequence of their intelligence of other countries. And in 
all climes and times they could manifest their noble quali- 
ties ; and they were cognizant of war and peace, and 
possessed of goodness, passion and ignorance. And they 
could keep their counsel, and judge of things finely, and were 
well-versed in the art of policy, and ever fair-spoken. 
Surrounded by such counsellors endowed with various quali- 
ties, the faultless king Da9aratha ruled the earth, gather- 
ing intelligence by means of spices, and righteously protecting 
the subjects, and preserving the people, and not sacrificing 
his duties, — famed over the three worlds. And munificent, 
and firm in promise in battle, that best of men ruled 
there this earth. Nor did he ever meet with a foe that was 
either his equal or superior. And possessed of friends, and 
having obedient commanders, and extricating his thorns by 
his might, that king ruled the earth, even as the lord of celes- 
tials ruleth heaven. And surrounded by those counsellors 
studious of his welfare, and bearing affection towards him, 
and clever, and competent, that king, by virtue of his prow- 
ess in subduing others, resembled the Sun surrounded by his 
rays. 



SECTION VIII. 

A.ND although engaged in austerities with the view of 
having sons born to him, the powerful and high-souled king, 
had.no son capable of perpetuating his line. And mentally 

i 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




*4 



RlMlFANA. 



turning the matter over, the high-souled one thought, “Wit 
do I not celebrate a horse-sacrifice with the intention oi 
obtaining a son ?” And that highly-energetic, ^ious and 
intelligent monarch, in consultation with all his counsellors 
of sedate minds, having made up his mind to celebrate the 
sacrifice, said unto that best of counsellors, Sumantra, — “Do 
thou speedily summon my spiritual guides, along with the 
family priests.” Thereupon, going out speedily, Sumantra of 
swift movements called together all the spiritual guides, as 
well as others versed in the Vedic ritual ; viz ., Suyajna, and 
VSmadeva, and Javali, and K§ 9 yapa, and Vasistha, and 
other principal twice-born ones. And having paid homage 
unto them, the virtuous king Da^aratha then spoke unto 
them these sweet words, consistent with duty and interest, 
— “Ever pining on account of a son, I know no happiness,— 
therefore it is my intention that I should celebrate a horse- 
sacrifice. I intend to celebrate it according to the ordinance. 
Do ye, therefore, consider how I may attain my object" 
Thereat, the Brahmanas with Vasistha at their head, exclaim- 
ing “Well ! Well !” approved the words that had fallen 
from the lips of the monarch. And exceedingly pleased, 
they spoke unto Da 9 aratha saying, — “Do thou order the 
necessary articles, loose the horse, and prepare the sacri- 
ficial ground on the north bank of the Sarayu. And, 0 
king, since with the intention of obtaining offspring thou 
purposest so piously, thou wilt surely obtain sons after 
thy heart.” And hearing these words of the regenerate 
ones, the king was highly gratified. And with eyes expanded 
in delight, he spoke unto his ministers, — “Do ye procure 
the necessary sacrificial articles, according to the injunction 
of my spiritual preceptors ; and loose a horse protected 
by a competent person, and followed by one of the chief 
family priests ; and do ye prepare the sacrifical ground on 
the north bank of the Sarayu ; and do ye in due ordered 
according to the ordinance perform the rites required to 



Digitized by CjOOQle 



\ 

l 




BlLA KJkNDA M. 



*5 



secure an uninterrupted completion to the ceremony. This 
ceremony is incapable of being celebrated by every king. 
Particular care should be taken that the sacrifice is not 
defective on account of any serious omission ; inasmuch as 
with learned Brahma-Rakshasas ever on the look-out to 
espy shortcomings in the ceremony, the performer thereof 
speedily perishes, should anything take place not consonant 
to the ordinance. And do ye possessed of ability so arrange, 
that this sacrifice may be completed in harmony with the 
ritual. ,, Thus addressed with due respect, the counsellors 
listened to the words of the monarch, and said, “So be it." 

Then taking the permission of that best of kings, those 
regenerate ones knowing duty, having blessed the monarch, 
returned to their respective quarters. And dismissing 
those Br&hmanas, the king spoke unto his minister, saying, 
— “Do ye, even as the family priests have ordered, arrange 
for the sacrifice !” Having said this, that mighty-minded 
and best of men dismissed his ministers, and himself 
entered into the inner apartment. And coming there, that 
lord of men said unto his favourite wives, — “Do ye know it 
for certain that in order to obtain a son I am going to 
perform a sacrifice. ,, And hearing those sweet words, the 
countenances of those shining dames looked resplendent, likd 
lotuses after the cold season is over. 



SECTION IX. 

(“T earing all about it, the king’s charioteer addressed 
the monarch in private, saying, — “Do thou listen to what is 
related in ancient history, and to what I have heard myself 1 
This horse-sacrifice is enjoined by the family priests ; and I 
have myself heard the following story celebrated in ancient 
chronicle. And what the worshipful Sanat KumSra had said 

4 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




RlMlYANA. 



*6 

formerly in the presence of the saints, applies, O king, to 
the case of thy having a son. “KSgyapa hath a son know 
by the name of Bibh£ndaka. He will get a son called 
Rhishyasringa. And he will grow up and pass his days io 
the woods. And that foremost of Br£hmanas will not know 
aught else save following his father. And, O king, it is 
rumoured abroad, and also always said by the Vipras, that 
that high-souled one will practise the two modes* of Brahma- 
charya life. And he will spend some time in serving the 
sacrificial fire and his famous sire. At this time, the power- 
ful Romap&da of exceeding strength will be famed as king 
of the Angas. And in consequence of some default on his 
part, there will occur in his kingdom a terrible and dreadful 
drouth, capable of striking terror into all. And filled with 
grief on account of this drouth, the king will call about 
him Veda-accomplished Br&hmanas, and speak unto 
them, saying, — “Ye are conversant with the Vedic ritual 
and the social duties. Do ye, therefore, tell me how 
to expiate for this evil.” And thus accosted by the king, 
those excellent Br&hmanas versed in the Vedas, will say 
unto that ruler of earth,— “Do thou, O monarch, by all 
means, bring Bibh&ndaka’s son. And having, O king, 
brought that BrSthmana versed in the Vedas, Bibh2ndaka's son 
Rhishyasringa, and duly honored him, do thou, O monarch, 
with a concentrated mind, bestow upon him thy daughter 
S&nt&, according to the ordinance.” And hearing those 
words of theirs, the king will begin to think as to how he can 
bring over lhat one endowed with energy. Then in consulta- 
tion with his counsellors, the prudent king having come to 
a conclusion, will, honoring them duly, desire his priest and 
his courtiers to set out in quest of Rhishyasriuga. There- 

* Those that assume the staff and the kamandalu are reckoned the first 
order ; while those that continue to li re with their wives are considered si 
nest in worth — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



i 




bXlakXndam 



*7 

upon hearing the king's words, with aggrieved hearts, and 
with heads hanging down, they will beseech the monarch, 
saying, — “Afraid of the saint, BibhSndaka, we shall not be 
able to repair thither.” Anon hitting upon the appropriate 
means, they say, — ‘We will search for the Vipra, and no 
blame shall attach unto us.’ — 

Thus by help of courtezans, the saint’s son was brought 
by the lord of the Angas. And then the god (Indra) poured 
down showers ; and the king conferred on him Sant§. And 
now thy son-in-law Rhishyasringa will help thee in obtaining 
a son. Now I have related unto thee what Sanat KumSra 
had communicated.” Thereupon king Dataratha, well 
pleased, spoke unto Sumantra, — “Do thou now tell me by 
what means Rhishyasringa was brought over (by the lord 
of the Angas)” 



SECTION X. 



Thus asked by the king, Sumantra said these words, — 
“I will relate unto thee how the counsellors brought Rhishya- 
sringa. Do thou listen with thy counsellors ! The priest 
together with the counsellors spoke unto RomapSda, saying, — 
‘The means that we have hit upon can never fail of effect.' 
Rhishyasringa hath been brought up in woods ; and is 
engaged in austerities and the study of the Vedas ; and is 
ignorant of the pleasure that ensueth from contact with 
women. By help of things agreeably ministering unto the 
senses, and ravishing the soul, we shall bring him to the 
city. Do thou, therefore, arrange for them ! Let courtezans 
of comely presence, clad in ornaments, repair thither. And 
if well treated, they will by various means bring him hither.' 
Hearing this, the king said unto the priest, — ‘So be it !' 
and laid the charge upon him, — who, however, made it 
over to the courtiers. And the; latter acted accordingly. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




RlMlVANA. 



a3 

And in accordance with the instructions, the courtexass I 
entered that great forest ; and remaining at some distance I 
from the hermitage, endeavoured to meet with the sober sob ^ 
of the saint ever dwelling in the woods. And satisfied ( 
with serving his sire, he never strayed from the hermitage; 
and consequently had never seen men and women, or any 
other creatures living in cities and towns. And it came to 
pass that on one occasion, walking about at will, Bibh&ndaka's 
son came to that spot and beheld the courtezans. And 
excellently attired, and singing in sweet voices, the women 
said unto the saint’s son, — ‘Who art thou ? And what 
dost thou, O Brahmana ? We wish to learn all this. And 
why is it that thou rangest alone this far-off forest ?’ Be- 
holding these beautiful damsels never seen before, he from 
delight, hastened to inform them of his lineage, ‘My father 
is Bibh&ndaka ; and I am his son, having sprung from his 
loins. My name is Rhishyasringa ; and my occupation is 
known the world over. And this auspicious hermitage hard 
by belongs to us ; and there I shall receive you all in due 
form.' Hearing the words of the saint’s son, they all con- 
sented, and the women went to behold that asylum. And 
when they had come there, the saint’s son received them 
hospitably, saying, — ‘Here is ArghyaJ ‘Here is water 
for washing the feet,’ ‘Here are fruits and roots.* And 
thereupon they readily received his hospitality. And 
actuated by the fear of the saint, BibhSndaka, they bent I 
their minds upon departing soon. And they said,-~-‘Do 
thou also, O twice-born one, receive from us these excellent 
fruits ! And, good betide thee, O Vipra, do not tarry 1’ 
And thereupon, embracing him joyfully, they gave unto 
him sweetmeats and various kinds of savoury viands. And 
tasting those things, that one of exceeding energy took them i 
for fruits, never tasted before by the dwellers of the forest. 
Then, having accosted him, the women, feigning the obser* I 
vance of some vow, went away, inspired with the fear of 



I 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



BlLAKlNDAM . 



*9 

li is father. And when they had gone, that twice-born one, 
Ka^yapa’s son, became sad, and from grief of heart went 
this way and that. And the next day his mind momentarily 
running upon it, the graceful son of BibhSndaka, endowed 
with prowess, came to that spot where he had encountered 
the comely courtezans, adorned with ornaments. And as 
soon as they observed him coming, they came forward, and 
said, — Do thou, O BrSLhmana, come unto our hermitage! 
There are in that asylum diverse kinds of fruits and roots ; 
and there thou wilt surely feed thy fill. Thereupon, hear- 
ing those words of theirs capable of influencing the heart, 
he became bent upon going, — and the women brought him 
away. And when that high-souled Vipra had been brought 
over, the good, Indra, suddenly poured forth plenteous show- 
ers, enlivening the spirits of men. And when the ascetic 
had arrived, with showers, the king approached him in 
humble guise, bending his head to the ground. And he 
offered him Arghya } in due form, and with a collected mind; 
and asked for his favor, so that wrath could not influence 
the Vipra. And taking him into the inner apartments, and 
in due form conferring upon him in sober mood his 
daughter Santa, the king became happy. Thus the highly 
powerful Rishyasringa together with his wife Santa, began 
to live there, respectfully ministered unto in regard to every 
desire.” • 

8ECTION XI. 

j^Lnd he said again, — “O foremost of monarchs, do thou 
listen to me as I relate how that intelligent Sanat Kumira, 
best of deities, spoke. ‘In the line of Ikshwaku will be born 
a righteous king, named Da^aratha, fair of form, and firm 
m promise. And that king will contract friendship with the 



Digitized by Google 




30 



rAmAfana. 



ruler of the Angas. And the latter will have a highly pios 
daughter, S§nt& by name. And the (old) king of the Angas 
will have a son, named Romap2da. And repairing unto him, 1 
the highly famous king Da9aratha will speak unto Roma- 
pSda, — O righteous-souled one I am without issue. Let 
Santa’s husband, desired by thee, take charge of this sacri- 
fice of mine, to be celebrated with the object of my obtain- 
ing a son to perpetuate the race. — Hearing these words of 
the king, and having pondered well, he will make over unto 
him Rhishyasringa of subdued senses, together with S£nti 
and his children. And taking that Vipra, that king, his 
mind free from anxiety, with a glad heart, will prepare 
for that sacrifice. And king Da9aratha, knowing duty and 
desirous of fame, with the intention of obtaining offspring > 
and heaven, with joined hands, will appoint that best of I 
Br&hmanas, Rhishyasringa, to conduct the ceremony. And 
that bringer of good will attain his object at the hands of 
that foremost of Br&hmanas ; and four sons will be born to 
him of immeasurable prowess, bringing fame unto the fami- 
ly, and known by all.’ Thus spoke formerly in the divine 
age, that worshipful and foremost of deities, Sanat KumSra. 
Therefore, do thou, O best of men, repairing thither, ac- 
companied with thy forces and equipage, thyself, O mighty king, 
bring Rhishyasringa over with due honors.” And hearing Su' 
mantra’s words, Da9aratha was exceedingly delighted. And 
hearing these words, and permitted by Vasishtha, he, accompa- 
nied with the ladies, and his courtiers, set out for the place 
where that twice-born one was. And gradually passing by woods 
and fells, he arrived at the place where that foremost of ascetics 
was. And coming before that best of regenerate ones, he I 
saw that sage’s son near Romap&da, like unto flaming fire. 
Then the king received him respectfully, and with a delight- 
ed mind, on account of the friendship he bore him. And he 
communicated unto the intelligent son of the saint, the fact 
of their intimacy, and then the latter paid homage unto 



Digitized by CjOOQle 



I 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



3 * 



Dayaratha. Having passed seven or eight days with 
Romapida, receiving high honors, that foremost of men, 
Dayaratha spoke unto Romapada, saying, — “ Let thy daughter, 
O king, together with her husband, O lord of men, repair unto 
my city. 1 am going to be engaged in a mighty enterprise.” 
Hearing this as to the journey of that intelligent one, the 
king said unto that Vipra, — “Do thou repair with thy wife 1” 
Thereupon the saint's son, promising to go, said unto the 
king, — “So be it !” And then with the king's permission, 
he set out with his wife. And Dayaratha and the puissant 
Romapada clasping each other by the palm, and embracing 
each other in affection, attained excess of joy. Then Raghu's 
son, bidding farewell unto his friend, set out. And he 
despatched swift messengers to the citizens, saying, — “Let 
the entire city be embellished ; let it be perfumed with dhupa , 
and watered and decked with pennons.” And hearing 
of the king's approach, the citizens joyfully did every 
thing as they had been commanded. Then the monarch, 
with that foremost of Brahmanas before him, entered the 
decorated city, to the blares of conchs and drums. And 
beholdirtg that Br&hmana entering the city, duly honored by 
• the prime of men, subservient unto Inara, like unto Kayyapa's 
son entering the celestial regions, honored of the thousand- 
eyed lord of the celestials, all the citizens rejoiced exceeding- 
ly. Then taking him into the inner apartment, and paying 
him homage according to the ordinance, the king considered 
himself as having gained his object, in consequence of the 
presence of that Brahmana. And all the inmates of the 
inner apartment, seeing the large-eyed Santa thus arrived 
with her husband, experienced excess of joy. Then honored 
by them and the king in especial, she happily spent there 
some time along with that twice-born one. 



Digitized by 



Google 




J* 



RlMll’ANA. 

8ECTI0N XII. 



Then after a long while, when the charming spring had 
appeared on the earth, the king conceived the desire oi 
celebrating the sacrifice. Then bowing down the head unto 
that Vipra effulgent like a celestial, he appointed him to 
undertake the ceremony, for the purpose of obtaining off- 
spring to perpetuate his line. Then that Br&hmana said unto 
that lord of the earth, the king, — “So be it ! Do thou order 
the necessary provisions, loose the horse, and prepare a 
sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayu.” Then the 
king spoke unto Sumantra, saying, — “O Sumantra, do thou 
sommou speedily BrSLhmanas versed in the Vedas and priests 
professing the Ved&nta philosophy — Suyajna, and Vamadeva, 
and J£vali, and K&9yapa, and the priest Vasistha, together 
with other excellent twice-born ones.” Thereupon Sumantra 
endowed with activity, bestirring himself, summoned all those 
versed in the Vedas. Then, honoring them duly, the virtuous 
king Da 9 aratha spoke unto them these amiable words, con- 
sistent with duty and interest, — “Aggrieved on account of 
a son, I have no happiness on earth, — and therefore, I have 
intended to celebrate a horse-sacrifice. And by the grace 
of the saint’s son, I shall obtain my desire.” Thereupon, 
the BrSLhmanas with Vasishtha at their head honored the 
words that fell from the king’s lips, saying,— “Well.” And 
the Br&hmanas headed by Rhishyasringa addressed the king, 
saying, — “Do thou arrange for the provisions, loose the 
horse, and prepare the sacrificial ground on the north bank 
of the Sarayu ! And since thou purposest so virtuously for 
obtaining offspring, thou shalt obtain four sons of im^ 
measurable prowess.” And hearing those words of the rege- 
nerate ones, the king was exceedingly delighted. And 
cheerfully he spoke these auspicious words to his courtiers, — 
“In accordance with the directions of my spiritual guide5 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bAlakUndam. 



33 



do ye speedily procure these provisions, — loose the horse 
well protected, and followed by a priest, — and prepare the 
sacrificial ground on the north bank of the Sarayu. And 
do ye perform the ceremonies capable of securing the rites 
from disturbance. Surely every king is competent to per- 
form this sacrifice. Yet care must be taken that no default 
occurs in it. For flaws in this foremost of sacrifices are 
watched by learned Brahma-Rakshasas. And should it come 
to be celebrated in violation of the ordinance, the performer 
thereof shall meet with instant destruction. And do ye so 
order that this sacrifice of mine may be completed accord- 
ing to the prescribed ritual.” Thereupon honoring those 
words of the king, the ministers did as ordered. And 
having eulogized the king knowing duty, the twice-born 
ones, with the Monarch’s leave, departed for their respective 
quarters. And when the Vipras had gone, the mighty- 
minded lord of men dismissing his counsellors, entered the 
inner apartment. 



SECTION XIII . 

A_ND when after a full one year, spring had again 
appeared on the face of the earth, the puissant king, intent 
upon getting offspring through the horse-sacrifice, saught 
Vasishtha’s side. And having saluted Vasishtha and duly paid 
him homage, he humbly spoke unto that best of twice-born 
ones, with the intention of having offspring. “Do thou, 
O Brahmana, undertake to perform this sacrifice of mine, 
according to the ordinance, O foremost of ascetics ! And 
do thou order so that no impediment may happen to the 
sacrifice! Thou art my kind friend, and prime and mighty 
spiritual guide. Engaged in it, thou wilt have to bear the 
entire burden of the ceremony.” Thereupon that best of 
Brahmanas said, — “So be it! I will do all that thou 

5 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




34 



AlMlrANA. 



askest.” He then said unto old Br&hmanas well-up is i 
sacrificial affairs, and experienced car-makers, and highly 
pious aged people, and servants, carrying on the ceremonial 
operations till the end, and artists, and carpenters, and 
diggers, and astrologers, and artizans, and dancers, and con- 
ductors of theatres, and pure and learned persons variously ^ 
versed in knowledge, — “Do ye, in obedience to the royal 
mandate, engage in the sacrificial work ! And fetch bricks 
by thousands! Do ye raise structures for the kings, 
commanding every convenience ! And do ye rear goodly 
and comfortable buildings by hundreds for the Brlhmanas, 
replenished with various meats and drinks. Ye should 
provide spacious apartments for the citizens and the dwellers 
of provinces, — and separate quarters for the princes, com- 
ing from foreign parts; and stables for horses, and dressing- 
rooms, — and wide apartments for native and foreign war- 
riors. And dwellings filled with diverse kinds of viands, and 
commanding everything desirable, — and mansions for tbe 
lower orders of the citizens, exceedingly beautiful to behold. 
And meats should be duly dispensed with respect, and not 
in the indifference of festive occasions, — so that all 
may regard themselves as honorably entertained. None 
should be disregarded out of lust or passion. Those 
persons, and artizans, that will labor eagerly in the sacrifice, 
should by turns, be especially entertained ; and servants, 
who, being entertained with gifts, do every thing completely, 
and omit nothing. And do ye, with hearts mollified by love, 
act so, that all our friends be well pleased with us." 

Then they approached Vasishtha, saying, — “Everything 
hath been performed properly, without anything being left 
out. And what thou sayest shall be performed, and nothing 
omitted.” Then summoning Sumantra, Vasishtha said these 
words, — “Do thou invite all those kings that are pious,— 
and Br&hmanas, and Kshatriyas and Sudras, by thousands. 
And do thou with due honors bring people from all countries 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bIlakXndam. 



35 



And, with proper honor thyself bring the righteous, truthful, 
and heroic Janaka, lord of MithiU. And it is because he 
is our old friend that I first mention him. Then do thou 
thyself bring the amiable and ever fair-spoken lord of K&si, 
of execellent character, resembling a celestial. Then do 
thou bringr hither along with his son, the highly-pious, old 
king of Kekaya, who is the father in-law of this best of 
monarchs ! Then do thou bring with due honors the puissant 
king of Ko^ala, and that mighty archer, the illustrious 
RomSpada, the friend of that lion of a king, and that foremost 
of men — the heroic, and highly generous lord of Magadha, 
versed in all branches of learning. And in accordance with 
the mandate of the king, do thou invite the foremost monarchs ! 
And do thou summon the kings of the East, of the Sindhu 
and Sauvira countries, and of Saurashtra, and of the South ! 
And do thou speedily bring those monarchs that are attached 
unto us, together with their friends and followers. Do thou 
in obedience to the mandate of the monarch, bring over 
these, despatching dignified emissaries !” 

Having heard those words of Vasishtha, Sumantra 
speedily ordered faithful persons anent the bringing over of 
the kings. And the virtuous Sumantra, in accordance with the 
injunction of the ascetic, himself speedily set out for the 
purpose of bringing the monarchs. And then the servants 
came and informed the intelligent Vasishtha as to the 
articles that had been got ready for the sacrifice. Then well- 
pleased that best of twice-born ones, the ascetic Vasishtha, 
said unto them, — “Do not give away disrespectfully or 
lightly. A gift bestowed with disrespect, indubitably des- 
troyed the giver.” 

Then for several days, kings began to pour into Da9a- 
ratha’s city daily and nightly, bringing with them various 
kinds of gems. Thereupon Vasishtha well-pleased said unto 
the king, — “O best of men, obeying thy mandate the 
kings have come here ; and I too, according to merit, have 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




3* 



RlMlYANA . 



received those excellent kings with respect. And every- 
thing hath been carefully made ready for the sacrifice by 
the persons concerned. Do thou, therefore, repair to the 
sacrificial ground, for performing the sacrifice. And, 0 
foremost of monarchs, it behoveth thee to view the place, 
filled with all desirable objects, and looking as if prepared by 
imagination herself. ,, 

Then in accordance with the injunctions of both Vasishtha 
and Rhishyasringa, the king came to the sacrificial spot on 
a day presided over by an auspicious star. Then, with, 
Rhishyasringa at there head, Vasishtha and the other prin- 
cipal Br&hmanas wending to the sacrificial ground, began 
the ceremony, according to the ordinance ; and in due form. 
And the auspicious king, in company with his wives, was 
initiated into the ceremony. 



SECTION XIV. 

after the expiry of full one year, when the sacrifi- 
cial horse had returned, the sacrifice of the king commenced 
on the north bank of the Sarayu. And with Rhishyasrinea 
at their head, the principal twice-born ones began the | 
proceedings in that mighty horse-sacrifice of that high-souled i 
monarch. And the priests, each duly and according to 
the ordinance performing his proper part, engaged in the 
ceremony in consonance with the scriptures. And the 
regenerate ones, having performed the pravargya as well 
as the upasada according to the ordinance, duly completed 
the additional ceremonies. Then, worshipping the deities 
with glad hearts, those foremost of ascetics duly performed 
the morning ablutions and the other prescribed rites, j 
The oblations of clarified butter first having been offered 
unto Indra, according to the ritual, the king with a puri- I 
fied heart performed his ablutions. And then the mid -day i 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



BlLAKlNDAM . 



37 



ablutions took place in proper sequence. And those fore- 
most of Br£hmanas, in due form, and according to the ordi- 
nance, officiated at the third bath of that high-souled monarch. 
And the priests presided over by Rhishyasringa, invoked 
Sakra and the other deities, reciting measured mantras . 
And the sacrificial priests, chaunting sweet Sdmas and soft 
mantras , duly invoking the dwellers of the celestial regions, 
offered each his share of the oblations. And no part 
of the ceremony was performed improperly, or left out,— 
and every thing was satisfactorily celebrated with mantras . 
And on that day no Brahmana ever felt tired, or hungry ; 
and there was none that was not learned, or that was not 
followed by an hundred persons. And BrShmanas, and 
Sudras having among them ascetics, and Sramanas, and the 
aged, and the infirm, and women, and children, were con- 
tinually fed. And although they ate their fill, yet they 
knew no repletion. And “Give food, and clothes of various 
kind” — (was heard all around). And those employed 
in the task gave away profusely. And every day food 
dressed properly in due form was to be seen in countless 
heaps resembling hills. And men and women coming from 
various countries to the sacrifice of that high-souled one 
were excellently entertained with meats and drinks. And 
the foremost regenerate ones said, — “The viands have been 
prepared in the prescribed form, and they taste excellent. 
We have been gratified. Good betide thee !” All this was 
heard by that descendant of Raghu. And persons adorned 
with ornaments distributed the victuals among the Br&hmanas, 
and they were assisted by others beaming jewelled 
pendants. And in the interval between the completion of 
one bath and the beginning of the next, mild and eloquent 
Vipras, desirous of victory, engaged in various disputations. 
And every day in that sacrifice, skilful Br&hmanas, engaged 
in the ceremony, did every thing, according to the ritual. 
And there was no twice-born one that was not versed in the 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




3 » 



RlMlVANA . 



Vedas and the VedSngas, or that did not observe vows, or 
that was not profoundly learned, — nor did any assist at the 
sacrifice that could not argue ably. And when the time came 
for planting the Yupas, persons cognizant of arts and sacri- 
ficial rites, prepared six Yupas of Vilwa , as many of catechu, 
and as many of Palasa, and one of Sleshmataka , and two of 
Devadaru well-made and measuring two outstretched arms. 
Persons versed in the arts and science of sacrifice constructed 
these Yupas. And at the time of throwing up the Yupas , 
for embellishing the sacrifice, these one and twenty Yupas , 
each measuring one and twenty AratniSy having eight 
angles, and smooth-faced were decked out in one and twenty 
pieces of cloth, and were firmly planted with due ceremonies 
by artizans. And being wrapped up in cloths, and worshipped 
with flowers, they looked like the seven Rishis appearing 
in the welkin. And an adequate number of bricks was 
also duly made (for the ceremony.) And Br&hmanas accom- 
plished in the arts constructed the sacrificial fire-place with 
those bricks. And that fire-place of that lion among kings, 
set by skilful BrShmanas, consisting on three sides of eight- 
een bricks, looked like the golden-winged Garura. And for 
the purpose of sacrificing them unto the respective deities were 
collected beasts and reptiles, and birds, and horses, and 
aquatic animals. And the priests sacrificed all these in pro* 
per form. And to these Yupas were bound three hundred 
beasts, as well as the foremost of the best horses belonging 
to king Da9aratha. Then Kau^alySL, having performed the 
preliminary rites, with three strokes slew that horse, experi- 
encing great glee. And with the view of reaping merit, 
Kau9aly&, with an undisturbed heart passed one night with 
that horse furnished with wings. And the Holds and 
Adhwaryus , and the Udgatas joined the king's Vdvdtd 

along with his Mahishi and Parivriti * And prie sts of su b- 
The Kshetriya kings could marry wives from among Kshetriyas, Vaishyas 
and Sudras. The Kshetriya wife is called Makiihec, the Vaishya wife VdvaU 
aud the Sudra wife Parivriti. — T . 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKXNDAM. 



39 



dued senses, well-up in sacrificial rites, began to offer obla- 
tions with the fat of the winged-horse, according to the 
ordinance. And that lord of men, desirous of removing his 
sins, at the proper time smelt the odour of the smoke arising 
from the fat, agreeably to the scriptures. And then sixteen 
sacrificial priests in the prescribed form offered the various parts 
of the horse unto the fire. It is customary in other sacrifices 
to offer the oblations by means of a Plaksha bough ; but in 
the horse-sacrifice a cane is used instead. The horse-sacri- 
fice, according to the Kalpa Sutras and the Brahmanas, 
extend over three days. T here after, on the first day was the 
Chatushtoma celebrated ; and on the second the Uktha t — 
and on the third the Atiratra . And then the Jyotish - 
toma , and then Ayushtoma , and the Atiratra % and the 
Abhijit } and the Viswajit, and the Aptoryama — all these 
various great sacrifices were celebrated with due rites. And in 
this mighty horse-sacrifice founded of yore by Sayambhu.that 
perpetuator of his line, the king, bestowed the Eastern 
quarter on his chief sacrificial priest, the Western on his 
Adhwaryu , the Southern on BrahmS, and the Northern on 
the Udgath } as Dakshtnas. And having completed that 
sacrifice, that perpetuator of his race, and foremost of men, 
the king, conferred on the priests the earth ; and having con- 
ferred it, that auspicious descendant of Iskhaku experienced 
high delight. And then the priests spoke unto that monarch, 
who had all his sins purged off, saying, — “Thou alone art 
worthy to protect the entire world. We do not want the 
earth ; nor can we rule it, being, O lord of Earth, cons- 
tantly engaged in Vaidika studies. Do thou, therefore, confer 
upon us something instead, as the price thereof. Do thou 
confer upon us gems, or gold, or kine, or anything else, for, 
0 foremost of monarchs, we do not want Earth.” Thus 
addressed by the Brahmanas versed in the Veda, that best 
of kings bestowed upon them ten lacs of kine, and ten Kotis 
of gold, and forty of silver. Then those priests in a body, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




40 



RlMlYANA . 



accepting the wealth, brought it unto the ascetic Rhishya- 
sringa and the intelligent Vasishtha. Then having received 
each his share, those foremost of regenerate ones were 
exceedingly pleased, and said, — “We have been highly 
gratified.” Then unto those Brahmanas that had come there, 
the king with due regard gave Kofis of gold. And then 
unto a certain poor twice-born one that asked for gifts, the 
descendant of Raghu gave an excellent ornament from his 
own arm. And, when the regenerate ones were thus properly 
gratified, that one cherishing the Brahmanas, with senses 
intoxicated by excess of joy, reverentially bowed unto them. 
And thereupon the Brahmanas uttered various blessings upon 
that generous king, bending low to the earth. Then having 
celebrated that excellent and sin-destroying sacrifice, bring- 
ing heaven, and incapable of being celebrated by foremost 
monarchs, king Dacaratha, well pleased, spoke unto Rhishya- 
sringa, saying, — ”0 thou of excellent vows, it behoveth thee to 
do that whereby my line may increase.” Thereupon the 
best of Brahmanas said, — “Be it so ! Unto thee, O king, will 
be born four sons, — perpetuators of their race.” Hearing 
these sweet words of his, that foremost of monarchs bended 
low unto him with controlled faculties, and experienced the 
excess of joy. And then that high-souled one again spoke 
unto Rhishyasringa. 



SECTION XV. 



Then that one of capacious intelligence, versed in the 
Vedas, having pondered for a time, and regained his senses, 
returned unto the king this excellent answer, — “On thy be- 
half, and with the view of obtaining sons for thee, I will 
by help of mantras laid down in the Atharva Veda, duly 
celebrate the famous ceremony, capable of crowning thee 
with offspring.” And then with the view of obtaining sons 



Digitized by UjOOQle 




BlLAKXNDAM. 



41 



(for the king), that effulgent one set about the son-conferring 
ceremony ; and in accordance with the ordinance, and with 
mantras , offered oblations unto the sacrificial fire. And the 
deities, with the Gandharbas , and the Siddhas, and the 
principal saints, assembled there duly, with the object of 
each obtaining his share of the offerings. And having 
duly assembled there, the deities addressed these words unto 
Brahm&, the lord of creatures, — “O thou possessed of the six 
attributes, through thy grace, a R&kshasa named Ravana 
oppresses us all by his prowess, — nor can we baffle him. 
And, O lord, as thou hast well-pleased conferred on him a 
boon, we always suffer him in deference to it. And 
the wicked-minded one harasseth the three worlds furnished 
with prosperity, and beareth ill-will unto them. And blinded 
by the boon he hath received, that irrepressible one 
intends to bring down the lord himself of the celestials, and 
the Yakshas, and the Gandharbas, and the Br&hmanas, and 
the Asuras. And the Sun doth not burn him, or the Wind 
blow about him ; and at sight of him, that one engarlanded 
with billows, the Ocean, dares not stir. Therefore, great is 
the fear that affficteth us, coming from that Rakshasa of 
dreadful appearance. And O lord, it behoves thee to de- 
vise some means for destroying him.” Thus addressed by the 
deities in a body, he said, — ‘’Alas ! I have, however, decided 
on the means of destroying that wicked-souled one. He had 
asked, — *May I be incapable of being slain by Gandharbas, 
and Yakshas^ and gods, and Rakshasas V — whereat I said, — 
‘Be it so P Through disdain, the Rakshasa did not at that 
time mention men. Therefore, by men alone he is capable of 
being slain ; nor can his end be compassed by any other 
means.” Hearing this welcome speech uttered by Brakm5, 
the deities and the Maharshis became exceedingly delighted. 
At this juncture, that lord of the universe, the highly-efful- 
gent Vishnu, clad in yellow apparel, and bearing in his hands 
the conch, the discus, and the mace, and adorned with bur- 
6 



igitized by 



Google 




4 * 



RlMlYANA. 



nished Keyuras; * arrived there, riding VinatVs son ; like unto 
the Sun riding the clouds. And worshipped by the foremost 
of the celestials, he drew near BrahmSL, and sat down with 1 
•a collected mind. And bending low before him, the deities 
spake unto him, saying , — “ O Vishnu, for the benefit of the 
worlds, we shall appoint thee to some work. Do thou, 0 
lord, dividing thyself into four, O Vishnu, become born as 
sons in the three wives, resembling Modesty, Auspiciousness, 
and Fame,— of Ayodhya’s lord, king Da 9 aratha, cognizant of 
Duty, and munificent, and possessing energy, and like unto a 
Maharshi. Do thou, O Vishnu, becoming man, slay in battle 
this thorn of the worlds ; the pampered R&vana, incapable 
•of being slain by the gods; for the foolish R&kshasa 
by virtue of sublimated prowess, baffles the deities, and 
the Gandkarbas , and the Siddhas, and the foremost of 
saints. And by him bereft of the sense of right and wrong, 
have saints and Gandkarbas and Apsaras sporting in the 
groves of Nandana, been wantonly slain. It is to com- 
pass bis death that accompanied by the ascetics, we have 
come hither: it is for this that the Siddhas and the Gan - 
dharbas and the Yakshas have taken refuge in Thee ! Thou, 

O God, art the prime way of us all, O repressor of foes ! Do 1 
thou, for bringing destruction unto the enemies of the gods, 
turn thy thoughts to being born as man.” Thus besought, 
that foremost of gods and chief of celestials, Vishnu, wor- 
shipped of all creatures, addressed the assembled deities, 
following Duty, with the Grand-sire at their head, saying — 
“Do ye renounce fear ! For your behoof, slaying in battle 
the wily and irrepressible Rlvana, dreadful unto the saints 
and the celestials, together with his sons, and grandsons, 
and friends, and counsellors, and relatives, and acquaint- 
ances, I will abide among mortals, ruling this earth for ten 
thousand and as many hundred years.” Having thus con* 



• A bracelet worn on the upper arm. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



BlLAKlNDAM . 



4T 



ferred a boon upon the gods, the god Vishnu of subdued 
soul fell to thinking as to the place where he would be born 
among men. Then that one of eyes resembling lotus-petals, 
dividing self into four parts, chose even king Dagaratha for 
his father. Thereat the celestials and the saints and the 
Gandharbas and the Rudras and the Apsaras hymned the 
Slayer of Madhu in excellent hymns : 

“Do thou utterly uproot the haughty R&vana of fierce 
prowess and enhanced insolence — that foe of the lord of 
celestials, who is the occasion of the tears of the three 
worlds* and dreadful unto ascetics; Slaying that one of 
terrible prowess, who distresses the three worlds, with his 
forces and friends, do thou, O foremost of gods, thy fever of 
heart removed, repair unto the celestial regions protected by 
thee and purged of all its faults and sins.” 



SECTION XVI. 



Thus besought by the foremost of the celestials, 
thatt searcher of hearts, Vishnu, although cognizant of the 
means whereby Rivana was to be destroyed, spake unto the 
gods these amiable words, — “What, ye gods, is the means 
of compassing the destruction of that lord of the Rakshasas, 
by adopting which I could slay that thorn of the ascetics ?” 
Thus addressed, the deities answered Vishnu, incapable of 
deterioration, saying, — “Assuming the form of a human 
being, do thou in battle slay Rlvana ! He, O repressor of 
foes, had for a long course of time performed rigid austrei- 
ties ; and thereat, that creator of all, the first-create Brahm& 

• Lit. the thorns of pious ascetics. — T. 

f Ndra means a multitude, and Ayana % dwelling-place. He whose dwell- 
ing-place is a multitude, is Ndrayana . Metaphorically, the word means 
evidently, tks Searcher ef hearts. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




44 



\RlM\YANA . 



was well pleased. And propitiated by his penances, the 
Master conferred'a boon on the R&kshasa to the effect, 
that, save man, no fear should come to him from the van- ^ 
ous beings. And in the matter of that boon-bestowing, 
man had formerly been disregarded by (Ravana). And puffed 
up with pride in consequence of the boon he received from 
the Grand-sire, he commits ravages upon the three worlds, 
and carries away the fair sex by violence. Therefore, O 
subduer of enemies, we have even fixed upon man for 
bringing about his death.” Hearing this speech of the 
celestials, Vishnu of subdued soul chose even king Dayaratha 
for his father. And at that time, eagerly wishing to | 
have sons, that destroyer of enemies, the effulgent king 
Dayaratha, who was sonless, was celebrating the sacrifice 
that conferreth male offspring. Then, having ascertained the 
course to follow, Vishnu, having greeted the Grand-sire, 
vanished there, worshipped by the deities and the Maharshis. 

And then himself bearing in his hands a capacious vessel 
made of burnished gold, with a silver cover, — dear like unto 
a spouse, and resembling the divine Creative energy, filled 
with celestial/ > ^y/7j^,*from out the sacrificial fire ofDayaratha , 
initiated into the ceremony, there arose a mighty being, of 
unparalleled prowess, high energy, and huge strength, black, 
and wearing a crimson apparel, with a red face, uttering the 
blares of a trumpet, and having a body covered with leonine 
hair, having whiskers and an excellent head of hair, furnished 
with auspicious marks, and adorned with celestial ornaments, 
and resembling a mountain-peak, and bearing the prowess of a 
flaming tiger, and like unto the Sun or tongues of flaming fire, i 
And with his eyes fixed upon Dayaratha, he addressed the 
king, saying, — *‘0 monarch, take thou me as a person commis- 
sioned by Prajapati ” Hearing him speak thus, Dayaratha, with 
joined hands, said, — ‘Lord, art thou well come ? What can 1 

* A preparation of milk, and sugar. — T. I 



Digitized by CjOOQ le 




bAlakAndam. 



45 



do for thee ?” Thereupon, that person despatched by Praja - 
pati again spake thus, — “O king, having adored the deities, 
thou hast to-day obtained this. Do thou foremost of kings, 
accept this excellent and divinly-prepared Pdyasa^ conferring 
sons, health, and affluence, — which thou art to give unto thy 
worthy consorts, saying , — Partake it. Through them thou 
wilt, O monarch, obtain sons, — for obtaining whom thou hast 
performed this sacrifice.” Thereupon, saying, — “So be it/' 
the lord ol men delightedly placed that divinely-bestowed 
golden vessel filled with the celestial Pdyasa upon his head. 
And having saluted that wonderful being of gracious presence, 
he in excess of joy began to go round him again and again. 
Then Da9aratha, having received that divinely-prepared 
Pdyasa , waxed exceeding glad ; like unto a pauper attaining 
plenty. Then that .highly effulgent being of a wonderful 
form, having performed that mission of his, vanished eveu 
there. And Da^aratha's inner apartment, being graced with 
the rays of joy, looked like unto the welkin flooded with the 
lovely beams of the autumnal moon. Then entering the 
inner apnitment, he spake unto Kau^alyS, saying, — “Take 
thou this Pdyasa ; for this will make thee bear a son.” Hav- 
ing said this, the king offered unto her a portion of this Pdyasa. 
Then he conferred upon Sumitra a fourth of it. Then inorder 
that she might have a son, king Da9aratha made over unto 
Kaikeyi an equal portion of what remained. And then having 
reflected, the mighty-minded one gave unto Sumitra the re- 
maining portion of th z Pdyasa resembling ambrosia. Thus the 
king dispensed th zPdyasa unto each and all of his wives. And 
those foremost wives of the king, having received that 
Pdyasa , became exceedingly delighted, and considered them- 
selves as highly honored. Then those excellent consoits of 
the lord of earth, having separately partaken of that choice 
Pdyasa t shortly bore offspring, resmbling fire or the Sun. 
And the king, beholding those wives of his bearing children, 
obtained his desire and became delighted ; even as that fore- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




46 



RlMlVANA . 



most of the celestials, Indra, while being worshipped by the 
Siddhas and the ascetics. 



SECTION XVII. 



W HEN Vishnu had accepted the sonship of that high* 
souled king, the self-create Lord addressed the celestials, say* 
ing, — “For assisting the heroic Vishnu firm in pormise, 
always seeking the welfare of us all, do ye create powerful 
beings, assuming shapes at will, cognizant of illusions, heroic, 
furnished with the celerity of the wind, versed in morality, 
possessing intelligence, like unto Vishnu in prowess, unslay- 
able, knowing the ways and means (of war and peace) gifted 
with excellent bodies, capable of resisting all weapons, and 
resembling immortals. And from forth the bodies of the 
foremost Apsaris , and Gandharbis , and Yaks his, and Pan • 
nagis, and Rikshis ,* and Vidhyddharis , and Kinnaris , and 
VanartSy t do ye produce sons wearing the shapes of monkeys. 
Formerly I had created that foremost of bears, J&mbuv&na, 
who suddenly came out of my mouth as I was yawning/ 1 
Hearing this mandate of Him possessed of the six attri- 
butes, they began to produce sons endowed with monkey- 
forms. And high-souled ascetics, and Siddhas, and Vtdyd - 
dharas % and Uragas , and Chdranas , generated heroic sons, — 
rangers of woods. And Indra begat as his son that fore- 
most of monkeys, V&li, resembling the Mahendra hill,— and 
that best of those imparting heat, the Sun, Sugriva. 
And Vrihaspati begat the mighty ape named T&ra, the most 
excellent and intelligent of the prime monkeys. And 
the Bestower of riches begat as his son the graceful ape 

• She-bears. — T. 

t She-monkays. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



47 



Gandham&dana. And V^wakarma begat that mighty 
monkey named Nala; and Agni begat as his son the powerful 
and graceful Nila in effulgence like unto the fire, who 
surpassed even his sire in energy, prowess, and renown. 
And the beautiful A^wins, endowed with the wealth of 
loveliness, begat Maindra and Dw ivida. And Varuna begat 
the monkey named Sushena ; and Paryyanya begat Sara- 
va, possessed of great strength. And the Wind god begat 
the graceful monkey named Hanum&n, endeued with a frame 
hard as adamant ; in fleetness like unto Vinata’s offspring ; and 
the most intelligent as well as the most powerful amongst all 
the principal monkeys. Thus produced, there suddenly came 
into being by thousands, mighty bears, and monkeys, and Go - 
puchchhas ,* of immeasurable strength, and heroic, and power- 
ful, assuming shapes at will, endowed with bodies resem- 
bling elephants of hills, — even those who would engage 
in compassing the destruction of the Ten-headed one. And 
the sons of the deities retained distinctly the respective 
hues, forms, and prowess, that characterized their several 
sires. And those that sprang from the t Golangulas, possess- 
ed even more than the might of the gods. Likewise, on 
Rtkshis and Kinnaris were gladly begot thousands upon 
thousands of monkeys, by gods, and Maharshis , and 
Gandarbas , and Tarkshyas, and famous Yaks has, and 
Nagds, and Kimpurushas y % and Siddhas and Vidy&dharas, 
and Uragas . And upon the principal Apsaris , and the 
Vidyddharis , and the daughters of the Ndgas, and the Gan - 
dar bis were begot by the Ckdranas as sons, heroic monkeys 
of gigantic bodies, ranging the forests and living on fruits 
and roots. And all these monkeys were endowed with 
strength ; and could assume shapes and repair everywhere, 

* Cow-tailed monkeys- — T. 

t Cow- tailed monkeys. — T. 

X Being half-man and half-beast. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




48 



rAmAjana. 



at will. And they were like unto lions and tigers, both i” 
pride and in prowess. And they faught with crags and hurled 
hills. And they faught with nails and teeth, — and were accom- 
plished in all weapons. And they could move the larges: 
hills ; and crush the fixed trees ; and with their impetus, vex 
that lord of rivers — the Ocean. And they could with their 
kicks rend the Earth, and swim over the mighty main. And , 
they could penetrate into the welkin, — and capture the ' 
clouds. And they could subdue mad elephants ranging 1 the I 
forest. And with their roars, they could bring down birds | 
singing. Thus came into being Kotis of high-souled leaders I 
of monkey-herds, assuming forms at will. And these became ^ 
the leaders of the principal monkey-herds; and they, in their 
turn, generated heroic monkeys, the foremost of the leaders | 
of herds. 

Some of these monkeys began to dwell on the top of 
the Rikshavana mountain ; while others inhabited various 
other mountains and forests. And all the leaders of monkey- 
herds stayed with those brothers, — Sugriva, the son of the 
Sun-god. and Vali, that of Sakra, — and also with Nala, and 
Nila, and Hanuman, and other leaders of monkey-herds. And 
endowed with the might of Garura, and accomplished in fight, 
they ranged around, poundiug lions, and tigers, and mighty 
Uragas. And the mighty-armed Vali of great prowess and 
redoubtable strength protected by virtue of the energy of j 
his arms Rikshas , and Gopuchchhas . and monkeys. And 
this earth, furnished with mountains, and forests, and oceans, ^ 
began to teem with those heroic lords of leaders of monkey- I 
herds, inhabiting different places, bearing characteristic | 
marks, resembling masses of clouds, or mountain-peaks, | 
possessed of mighty strength, and of terrible bodies and | 
visages, — in order that they might assist R&ma. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKlXDAM. 



49 



SECTION XVIII. 



"\V HEN the horse-sacrifice of the high-souled Da^aratha 
had been completed, the immortals, accepting each his 
share, returned whence they had come. And the monarch, 
having observed all the rules of initiation, entered the 
palace with his equipage and retinue. And the lords of 
he earth, having been received suitably by the king, with 
glad hearts set out for their own countries, saluting that 
foremost of ascetics (Rhishyasiinga). And clad in bright 
apparel, the delighted forces belonging to those graceful 
kings repairing to their own homes, looked exceedingly 
beautiful. When the lords of the earth had gone away, the 
graceful king Da^aratha re-entered his palace, with the 
foremost of regenerate ones at his head. And followed by 
the intelligent monarch with his retinue, Rhishyaringa, 
having been duly honored, set out with Santa. Having thus 
dismissed them all, the king, his object attained, began to 
dwell there happily, expecting sons. 

And then when tbe six seasons had rolled away after the 
completion of the sacrifice, in the twelfth month, on the 
ninth lunar day, under the influence of the Punarvasu 
asterism, when the Sun, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter , and 
Venus were at Arius , Capricorn , Libra , Cancer , and Pisces , 
—and when Jupiter had arisen with the Moon at Cancer, 
Kaugalyi. gave birth to that lord of the universe, bowed 
unto by all the worlds, R&ma, the descendant of Ikshw&ku, 
furnished with excellent marks, — the one half of Vishnu, — 
exceedingly righteous, with rosy eyes, and mighty arms, and 
crimson nether lip, and endowed with a voice like the sound 
of a kettledrum. Then on having given birth to that son 
of immeasurable prowess, Kau^alyd looked resplendent, like 
Aditi on having brought forth that foremost of celestials — the 

7 



Digitized by 



Google 




5o 



JR Am A FAN A. 



wielder of the thunder-bolt. And then was born of Kaikeyi, 
Bharata, having truth for prowess, endowed with all the 
virtues, and the very fourth part of Vishnu. And then 
Sumitra gave birth unto Lakshmana and Satrughna, heroic, 
and skilled in all weapons, and endowed with the half of 
Vishnu. And Bharata of purged intelligence was born under 
the asterism Pushya , when the Sun had entered Pisces ; while 
the two sons of Sumitra were born when the Sun arose in 
Cancer , under the asterism of Aslesha .* 

And thus were separately born four high-souled sons 
unto the king, crowned with qualities, and graceful, and in 
loveliness resembling the constellations Prosthapada t 
Thereat the Gandharbas began to chaunt sweetly, and the 
Apsaras to dance. And the celestial kettledrums sounded ; 
and there showered down blossoms from the sky. And high 
festivities were commenced by the multitude in Ayodhyi. 
And the spacious highways became filled with players and 
dancers, glittering with all kinds of gems, and resounding 
with the music of singers and performers on instruments. 
And the king bestowed gifts upon bards and genealogists 
and penegyrists, and he also gave kine by thousands to 
Brahmanas. 

And when the eleventh day had gone by, the king per- 
formed the Naming ceremony of his sons. And experiencing 
great delight, Vasishtha conferred the names. And the high- 
souled eldest one was called Rima ; and Kaikeyi’s son was 
called Bharata ; and Sumitra’ s son was called Lakshmana, — 
and the last was named Satrughna. And the king fed the 
Br§hmanas as well as the inhabitants rural and urban ; and 
he bestowed heaps of jewels upon Br&hmanas. Thus did 
he celebrate the natal rites of the princes. And among all 



• The ninth lunar mansion. — T. 

t Otherwise called Uttarabhddrapada and Purvabhddrapada . — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



bAlakAndam. 



5 * 



)f Ki those princes, the eldest, Rama, like unto Ketu,* and the 
rithi special delight of his father, became the object of general 
An l j : regard, even as the self-create Himself. And all of them were 

ia ( hr versed in the Vedas, and heroic, and intent upon the welfare 
tjtfk of others. And ail were accomplished in knowledge ; and 
m - endowed with virtues. And among them all, the exceeding- 
w; t: ly puissant R§ma, having truth for prowess, was the desire 

A? of every one, and spotless like unto the Moon himself.t 
He could ride on elephants and horses, and was an adept 
yi in managing cars. And he was ever engaged in the study 

j.; of arms, and aye occupied in ministering unto his sire. And 

even from early youth, that enhancer of auspiciousness, 
ii; .7 Lakshmana, was ever attached unto his eldest brother Rlma, 

r ., that delight of all. And like unto another life of Rama, 

j < Lakshmana furnished with auspiciousness was in everything 

attentive to Rama’s wishes, even at the neglect of his own 
person. And that foremost of persons did not even attain 
sleep without Rama’s company, — nor did he partake any 
f sweetmeat that was offered, unless Rama partook it with him. 
And when mounted on horse-back, Raghava went a-hunting, 
Lakshmana went at his back bow in hand, protecting him. 
And that younger brother of Lakshmana, Satrughna, likewise 
became ever dearer unto Bharata than life itself. 

And on account of those exalted and well-beloved sons 
of his, Da£aratha experienced the excess of joy, like unto 
the Grand-sire on account of the celestials. And when they 
came to be furnished with knowledge, and crowned with 
virtues, and endowed with bashfulness and fame, and to 
> attain wisdom in everything, and to be far-sighted, Da9aratha, 
the father of such powerful and flamingly effulgent sens, 
became delighted even like that lord of worlds — BrahmS. 
And those best of men, ever engaged in the study of 

* The ninth of the planets. — T. 

' f The Moon is a male in Sanskrit. — T. 



Digitized by Google 




5 * 



RlMlYANA. 



the Vedas, were accomplished in the art of archery— and 
always intent upon ministering unto their father. 

And once upon a time, when the virtuous king Da 9 a rat ha, 
surrounded by his priests and friends, was reflecting about 
the nuptials of his sons, unto that high-souled one engaged 
in thought in the midst of his counsellors came the mig-hty 
ascetic Visw&mitra. And desirous of seeing the king, be 
said unto the warders, — “Do ye speedily announce that I, 
GSdhi’s son, sprung in the Ku^ika line, have come !'* Hear- 
ing those words of his, they, urged on by them, all hurriedly 
began to run towards the royal chambers. And coming to 
the royal apartments, they communicated to IkshwSku's 
descendant the arrival of the ascetic Viswftmitra. Hearing 
those words of theirs, Da 9 aratha surrounded by his priests, 
went out delightedly to meet him, like Visava going out to 
meet Vrihashpati.* And having come unto that ascetic 
observing vows and of flaming energy, the monarch with a 
cheerful countenance offered him the Arghya. And there- 
upon, having accepted the king's Arghya in accordance 
with the ordinance, he enquired of the lord of men as to his 
continued prosperity and peace. And the exceedingly virtu- 
ous descendant of Ku^ika asked the king concerning the 
welfare of the exchequer, and the provinces ; and the peace 
of his friends and acquaintances. “And are thy captains sub- 
missive : and hast thou vanquished thy foes ? And hast thou 
performed well the human and the divine rites ?’* And 
approaching Vasishtha and the other anchorites, that foremost 
of ascetics of exalted piety duly asked them touching their 
welfare. And having been properly received by the monarch, 
they with glad hearts entered the royal residence, and sat 
them down according to precedence. Then gladly worshipping 
the mighty ascetic, Viswamitra, the exceedingly generous king, 

• The text has Brakmanam Vrihashpati is the Brahma of the gods«» 
Vrikatkpatir dfvtiftam Bfakn*a, — i*e<.oHing to Sruti — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKlXDAM. 



33 



well-pleased, addressed him, saying, — “Like unto the obtain- 
ing of ambrosia, like unto a shower in a land suffering from 
drouth, like unto the birth of sons of worthy wives to him 
without issue.like unto the recovery of a lost thing, yea, — like 
unto the dawning of a mighty joy, 1 consider this thy arrival. 
O i'lustrious ascetic, thou art well come. What is even 
that which is nearest to thy heart. What shall I do for thee, 
experiencing sincere pleasure ? Thou, O BrShmana, art 
worthy of my best services. By luck it is that, O bestower 
of honor, I have gained thee. To-day my birth hath been 
crowned with fruit — to day hath my life attained its object. 
And truly yesternight hath been succeeded by an auspi- 
cious morning, since I have beheld thee. Having first attained 
exceeding effulgence by virtue of austerities performed 
for obtaining the title of Rdjarshi \ thou hast afterwards 
obtained the status of a Brahmarshi. Thou art worthy of 
manifold homage from me. This thy exceedingly holy arrival 
appeareth wonderful. O lord, by beholding thee, surely my 
body hath been rendered pure. Tell me, what is it that 
thou wouldst have, — and what is the purpose of thy coming? 
I wish that 1 may be obliged by doing thy will. And, O 
thou of excellent vows, thou ought noi: to hesitate. I will 
every way accomplish thy will ; for thou art my god. 
O regnerate one, surely great prosperity cometh to me in 
consequence of thy coming, in as much as it shall be the 
means of bringing me entire and excellent merit, O Br&h- 
mana ! M Hearing this soul-soothing, ear-charming, and 
free-humble speech that was uttered, that illustrious prime 
of ascetics crowned with virtues, and furnished with all 
perfections, experienced exceeding delight. 



^ Digitized by 



s 

Google 




54 



RlMlVANA. 
SECTION XIX. 



Hear.NO those astonishing words of that lion-like 
king,the highly-energetic ViswSroitra with his down standing 
on end, said, — “O foremost of kings, sprung from an illustrious 
line, and having Vasishtha for thy guide, these words become 
thee alone on earth and no one else. Do thou, O best of 
kings, ascertain thy course in respect of the matter 1 bear 
in my heart ; and do thou prove firm in promise J For 
celebrating a sacrifice, I, O foremost of men, abide by some 
prescribed course. And it comes to pass that two Rakshasas 
assuming shapes at will, have become bent upon disturbing 
the ceremony. And in that sacrifice which I have determined 
to bring to a completion, and which is on the eve of being 
completed, both these Rakshasas, Maricha and Suvahu, 
accomplished in arms and possessed of prowess, shower flesh 
and gore upon the altar. And on that ceremony being 
thus disturbed and my purpose thus frustrated, I considcicd 
my labors as all lost, and, therefore, have left my country 
in dejection. And, O monarch, I cannot bring myself to 
vent my wrath ; for such is the nature of that business, that 
it is not proper for one engaged in it to utter a curse. There- 
fore, O foremost of monarchs, it behoves thee to grant me 
thy eldest son, the heroic R§ma of genuine prowess, with 
the side-locks. By virtue of his own divine energy, he, being 
protected by me, is capable of even destroying those Raksha- 
sas disturbing the ceremony. And I will, without doubt, confer 
upon him manifold blessings, — by means of which he will 
secure the golden opinions of the three worlds. And en- 
countering R5ma, they will by no means be able to stand him, 
nor is there any other who dares to slay them. And puffed 
up with energy, they have become ensnared at the hands of 
KSla,* — and, O best of monarchs, they are no match for 

* Yama, the god of death. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bXlakAndam. 



55 



Rlma. Nor, 0 king, ought thou to indulge in paternal 
affection. For ten nights only R£ma is to remain there, with 
the object of slaying those foes to my sacrifice, those 
R£kshasas disturbing the rites. I tell thee, do thou consider 
the R&kshasas as already slain.. I know full well Rama of 
sterling prowess, — as also the highly-energetic Vasishtha and 
the other ascetics present here. And if thou, O king, set thy 
heart upon acquiring religious merit and high fame on earth, 
do thou then grant me R&ma ! And, O Kakutstha,* if thy 
counsellors together with the Brahmanas having Vasishtha 
at their head, consent, do thou then dismiss Rama ! Even 
this is my wish, — and he also hath come of age. Do thou, 
therefore, part with thy son, the lotus-eyed RStma, for the 
ten days of the sacrifice ! Do thou act so, O descendant of 
Raghu, that the time appointed for the ceremony may not be 
overpassed. Good betide thee ! Let not thy mind indulge 
in grief !” 

Having said these words consistent with virtue and 
interest, the mighty-minded and highly-powerful Viswamitra 
paused. And hearing the auspicious words of Viswamitra, 
that foremost of kings shook with a mighty sorrow, and 
became bewildered. Then, having regained his sense, he rose 
up and became cast down through apprehension. Having 
heard the words of the ascetic, capable of rending the mind 
and heart, the high-souled king of men became stricken with 
grief and shook on his seat. 



SECTION XX. 



Hearing the words of Viswamitra, that best of 
monarchs remained insensible for a time, — and then regaining 

* From Kakud , an emblem of royalty and Stha, residing, — meaning a 
prince, the grandson of Ikshwakv. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




5« 



KlMl VAX A. 



his sense, spake thus, --“My lotus-eyed Rama is not yet 
turned of sixteen ; and I do not perceive his fitness to cope 
with Rakshasas in battle. I am the lord of this Akshauhini* 
of forces. Marching with this, will I engage with the night- 
rangers. And these servants of mine are valiant, and 
warlike, and accomplished in weapons, and capable of 
fighting the Rakshasas, — therefore, it behoveth thee not to 
take Rama. And myself bow in hand, stationed at the van 
of the array, will battle with the rangers of the night as long 
as life is spared unto me. And then well protected, thy 
sacrifice will hold an unimpeded course. Therefore, 1 will 
repair thither, — and it behoveth thee not to take Rama. 
And youthful, and unaccomplished, and not knowing what 
constitutes strength and what not, and not equipped with 
the energy of science, — and unskilful in fight, he is not 
a match for Rakshasas, — they being deceitful warriors. 
Bereft of Rama, O best of ascetics, I cannot live for a 
moment. Therefore, it behoveth thee not to take him, If, 
O BrMunana, it is thy intention to take Rama, then, O thou 
of excellent vows, do thou also take me along with the 
Chaturartga\ forces ! O Ku^ika’s son, I am sixty thousand 
years old ; and (at this age) 1 have obtained Rama after 
undergoing extreme troubles, — it therefore becometh thee 
not to take Rama. And among the four sons of mine, I find 
my highest delight in Rama, my first-born, and the most 
virtuous of them all, — therefore, it behoveth thee not to take 
Rama. What is the prowess of the Rakshasas ? And whose 
sons are they ? And who, pray, are they ? And what are the 
proportions of their bodies t And who protecteth them, 0 
foremost of ascetics ? And by what means shall either Rama, 
or my forces, or, O Brahmana, I myself be able to slay in fight 
those deceitful warriors — the Rakshasas ? Do thou tell me, 

* A complete army consisting of 1,09,350 foot, 65,610 horse, 21,870 
chariots, and 21,^70 elephants.— T. 

t An army consisting of foot, horse, elephants, and cars.^-T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





BlLAKlNDAtt. 



57 



O adorable one, inflated as they are by virtue of their prow- 
ess, how can I stand them in fight ?” Hearing that speech 
of his, Viywftmitra said, — “ There is a R&kshasa named 
R*«ivana, sprung from the line of Pulastya. Having obtained 
sl boon from Brahm&, he boldly opposeth himself to the three 
worlds, being possessed of great strength, and prowess, and 
backed by innumerable Rikshasas. And, O mighty monarch, 
I also hear that that lord of the Rikshasas is the very 
brother of Vai^ravana and the son of the ascetic V^ravan. 
And when that one possessed of mighty strength does not 
stoop to disturb the sacrifice himself, those powerful 
R£kshasas, M&rich and Suv&hu, being incited by him, dis- 
turb the rites.” The ascetic having spoken thus, the king 
then answered him, — “ I am incapable of standing that 
wicked-souled one in fight. Therefore, do thou, O thou 
versed in morality, extend thy favor unto my son ! Of slender 
fortune as 1 am, thou art my guide and my god. Even the 
celestials and the Ddnavas and the Gandharbas and the 
Birds and the Snakes are incapable of bearing R&vana in 
battle — what then is man ? He depriveth in conflict even 
the puissant of their prowess. I cannot fight either with him 
or with his forces. And, O foremost of ascetics, whether 
thou art accompanied with my son or my forces, thou wilt 
not be able to stand him. And how can I, O Br&hmana, 
make over unto thee my son, of tender years, resembling an 
immortal, who is ignorant of warfare ? I will not part with 
my son. The sons of Sunda and Upasunda resemble K&la 
himself in battle, — and it is they who are disturbing thy 
sacrifice. Therefore I will not part with my son. And 
MSricha and Suv£hu are possessed of prowess, and accom- 
plished in weapons. But with my friends I will repair to 
encounter one of them. If thou do not consent to this, I 
beseech thee with my friends, (do thou desist !)” Hearing 
these words of the lord of men, a mighty ire took possession 
of that foremost of regenerate ones, Ku^ika’s son ; and the 
8 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




58 



RlMlYANA. 



fire of the Maharshi's wrath flamed up even like unto a fire 
fed by fuel and clarified butter. 



SECTION XXI. 



Hearing those words of Da9aratha, composed of 
letters faltering with affection, Ku^ka’s son, stirred up with 
auger, answered the monarch, saying, — ‘‘Having promised 
me first, thou endeavourest to renounce that promise of 
thine. This surely is unworthy of a descendant of Raghu, — 
and this can bring destruction upon the dynasty. If, O 
king, in acting thus, thou hast acted properly, I will 
then repair to the place whence I had come. O K&kuthstha’s 
descendant false in promise, do thou attain happiness, being 
surrounded by thy friends. ,, And when the intelligent 
Vi9wamitra was exercised with wrath, the entire earth began 
to tremble, and the gods even were inspired with awe. 
And knowing that the entire universe was in trepidation, 
that mighty saint, the sedate Vasishtha of excellent vows, said 
these words unto the king, — “Born in the line of Ikshw&ku, 
thou art the very second self of virtue. And endowed 
with patience, and auspicious, and observing excellent 
vows, thou ought not to renounce virtue. The descendant of 
Raghu is famed over the three worlds as righteous-souled. Do 
thou maintain thy habit of adhering to promise ; for it doth 
not behove thee to act unrighteously. If having promised, — ‘I 
will do so/ thou dost not act up to thy word, the merit thou hast 
achieved by digging tanks and by performing sacrifices shall 
come to naught, — therefore do thou renounce Rama ! Ac- 
complished or not accomplished in weapons, the R^kshasas 
cannot bear him protected by Ku^ika's son, like ambrosia, 
by flaming fire. This one is Virtue incarnate : this one is the 
foremost of those possessing prowess. This one surpasseth 
all others in learning, and is the refuge of asceticism. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



59 



This one is cognizant of all the weapons that exist in the 
three worlds furnished with mobile and imobile things ; but 
others do not know him, — nor yet shall know him hereafter. 
And neither the gods, nor the saints, nor the immortals, nor 
the RSkshasas, nor the foremost of Gandharbas and Yakshas, 
nor the Kinnaras, nor the mighty Serpents can know him. 
And formerly while the descendant of Ku£ika was ruling 
his kingdom, Siva conferred upon him the highly famous sons 
of Kri£§£wa in the shape of all weapons. And those sons of 
Kr^a^wa were the offspring of Prajapati’s daughters. They 
were endowed with various forms, and were effulgent and 
dreadful. And Daksha’s daughters of elegant waists, Jaya and 
Suprabha, brought forth an hundred exceedingly effulgent 
weapons, And by virtue of her boon, Jaya obtained fifty sons 
of immeasurable strength and endued with the power of 
becoming invisible for the purpose of slaughtering the hosts 
of the Asuras. And Suprabha also brought forth fifty sons 
named Sankaras , incapable of being borne, and infallible, 
and powerful. Ku^ka’s son is adequately conversant with 
all those weapons. And that one knowing duty is also 
capable of creating wonderful weapons. And, O descendant 
of Raghu, there is nothing present, past, or future which is not 
known by that foremost of ascetics of high soul, and cogniz- 
ant of morality. Such is the prowess of that highly famous 
Vi^wSLmitra possessed of mighty energy. Therefore, O king, 
it behoveth thee not to hesitate in the matter of Rama’s going. 
The descendant of Ku^ka is himself capable of repressing 
the Rakshasas ; and it is in order to thy son’s welfare that 
coming unto thee, he asketh for him of thee.” At this speech 
of the ascetic, that foremost of Raghus, the king, well- 
pleased, became exceedingly delighted. And that famous one, 
relishing the journey of Rama, began to reflect in his mind 
about consigning him unto Ku^ika’s son. 



Digitized by 



Google 




6o 



RAmXI’ANA. 



SECTION XXII. 



XT PON Vasishtha’s representing this, king Da^aratha 
himself, with a complacent countenance, summoned unto him 
Rama and Lakshmana. And when the auspicious rites had 
been performed by both Rama’s father and mother, and when 
the priest Vasishtha had uttered mantras , king Da 9 aratha, 
smelling his son’s crown, with a glad heart, made him over 
unto the descendant of Kusika. Then there blew a Breeze free 
from dust and of delicious feel, on witnessing the lotus-eyed 
Rama at the hands of V^wamitra. And as the high-souled one 
was about to set out, blossoms began to shower down copi- 
ously, accompanied with the sounds of celestial kettle-drums 
and the loud blares of conchs. V^wamitra went first, and 
next the highly famous Rama with the side-locks, holding 
the bow. And him followed Sumitra’s son. And equipped 
with quivers, and with bows in hand, gracing the ten cardinal 
points and resembling three-hooded serpents, they followed 
the high-souled Vicwamitra, like the two stalwart Aswins 
following the Grand-sire. And those effulgent ones of faultless 
limbs went in the wake of the ascetic, illumining him with 
their grace. And like unto those sons of his, Skanda and 
Bisakha following the incomprehensible deity, Sthanu, 
those youthful brothers of comely persons and faultless 
limbs, Rama and Lakshmana, highly effulgent, carrying 
bows in hand, adorned with ornaments, and equipped 
with scimitars, with their fingers encased in Guana skin, 
flamingly followed Ku^ka’s son, beautifying him with 
their splendour. And having proceeded over half a Yojana t 
and arriving at the right bank of the Sarayu, Vi^w&mitra 
addressed these sweet words unto Rama, — *‘0 Rama ! do 
thou, O child, take of this water : let no delay occur. Do 
thou receive the mantras Vala and Ativala, — and thou wilt 
not feel fatigue or fever or undergo any change of look, and 



Digitized by 



Google 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



6 1 



whether asleep or heedless, the R&kshasas will not be able to 
surprise thee. And, O Rama, the might of thy arms will be un- 
equalled in this world, — nay, in all the three worlds. 
There shall be none — thy equal. Do thou, O R&ghava, 
recite VaUL and Ativala, O child ! And, O sinless one, 
when thou hast secured these two kinds of knowledge, 
none in this world will equal thee in good fortune, or in talent, 
or in philosophic wisdom or in subtle apprehension, or in 
the capacity of answering a controversialist ; for Val§. and 
AtivalSL are the nurses of all knowledge. And, O Rima, O 
foremost of men, if thou recitest Vala and Ativala on the way 
neither hunger nor thirst will exercise thee, O descendant of 
Raghu ! And if thou recitest these, thou wilt attain fame on 
earth. Those sciences fraught with energy are the daughters of 
the Grandsire. 1 intend to confer them upon thee, O 
K&kutstha ; and, O lord of earth, they are worthy to be 
conferred upon thee as thou art possessed of various virtues. 
Thou need not entertain any doubt about it. And if thou learn 
them like unto the exercise of asceticism they will prove 
of manifold good unto thee.” Thereat Rima with a cheerful 
countenance sipping water, with a purified body received 
those sciences from the Maharshi of subdued soul. And 
furnished with the sciences, Rama of dreadful prowess 
appeared resplendent, even like the adorable autumnal Sun 
invested with a thousand rays. Then Rama having rendered 
unto Ku^ika’s son all the duties appertaining to a spiritual 
guide, the three happily spent that night on the banks of the 
Sarayu. And although those excellent sons of Da9aratha 
lay down on an unbeseeming bed of grass, yet in consequence . 
of the sweet converse of Kugika’s son, the night .seemed to 
pass plearantly away. 



Digitized by 



Goggle 




6 2 



RlMlYANA. 



8ECTI0N XXIII. 



jAlnd when the night had passed away, the mighty 
ascetic spoke unto K&kutstha, lying down on a bed of leaves, 
— “O Rama, the best son of Kau^alyS, the first Sandhya* 
should now be performed. Do thou, O foremost of 
men, arise ! Thou shouldst perform the purificatory rites 
and contemplate the gods.” Hearing those proper words of 
the ascetic, those foremost of men, endowed with hero- 
ism, bathed, and, offering Arghya , began to recite the 
G&yatri.f And having performed these daily duties, those 
exceedingly powerful ones, greeting Vi<?wamitra having 
asceticism for wealth, stood before him, with the object of 
starting on their journey. And as those ones endowed with 
exceeding prowess were proceeding, at the shining confluence 
of the Sarayu and the Ganga they beheld a noble river flowing 
in three branches. And there lay a holy hermitage, belonging 
to ascetics of subdued souls, where they had been carrying on 
their high austerities for thausands of years. Beholding 
that sacred asylum, those descendants of Raghu, exceedingly 
delighted, spake unto the high-souled Vi^wamitra, these 
words, — “Whose is this sacred hermitage ? And what man 
liveth here ? O worshipful one, we are desirous of hearing 
this. Surely, great is our curiosity.” At those words of theirs, 
that foremost of ascetics, smiling, said, — “Hear, O R§ma, as 
to whom the asylum belonged in time past. Kandarpa, 
called K§ma by the wise, was once incarnate (on earth.) And 
it came to pass that as that lord of the deities, Sth2nu, having 
performed here his austerities in accordance with the prescribed 
restrictions, was wending his way in company with the 
Maruts, that fool-hardy wight dared disturb the equanimity 

• Brahmanas havo to perform their daily devotions thrice, -in the morning, 
at noon, and in the evening. — T. 

t The solar hymn of the Veda. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BALAKANDAM. 



63 



of his mind. Thereupon, 0 descendant of Raghu, uttering 
a roar, the high-souled Rudra eyed him steadfastly. And 
thereat all the limbs of that perverse-hearted one became 
blasted. On his body being consumed by that high- 
souled one, K&ma was deprived of his person in consequence 
of the ire of that foremost among the deities ; and, O R2L- 
ghava, from that time forth, he hath become known as 
Ananga* And the place where he was deprived of his body 
is the lovely land of Anga. This sacred hermitage belongs 
to Siva; and these ascetics engaged in pious acts, O hero, have 
been from father to son his disciples. And no sin toucheth them. 
Here, O R&ma, in the midst of the sacred streams, will we 
spend the night, O thou of gracious presence, crossing over 
on the morrow. Let us then, having purified ourselves, 
enter the holy hermitage ! It is highly desirable for us to 
sojourn here, — here will we happily spend the night, having 
bathed, and recited the mantras, and offered oblation unto 
the sacrificial fire, O best of men ! ” 

As they were conversing thus, the ascetics were highly 
delighted on discovering them by means of their far-reaching 
spiritual vision, — and they .rejoiced greatly. Then giv- 
ing Ku 9 ika f s son water to wash his feet and Arghya % 
and extending unto him also the rites of hospitality, 
they next entertained Rama and Lakshmana. And having 
experienced their hospitality, they (the guests) delighted 
them with their talk. And then the saints with collected minds 
recited their evening prayers. And having been shown their 
destined place of rest along with ascetics of excellent vows, 
they happily passed that night in that hermitage affording 
every comfort. And that foremost of ascetics, the righteous- 
soulcd son of Ku 9 ika, by means of his excellent converse, 
charmed the prepossessing sons of the monarch. 

♦ Lit. the bodiless. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




XlAJlYANA. 



64 



SECTION XXIV. 



Then next morning which happened to be fine, those 
repressors of their foes, with V^wamitra who had per- 
formed morning rites at their head, came to the banks 
of the river.* And those high-souled ascetics observing 
vows, having brought an elegant bark addressed Vi^wamitra, 
saying, — “Do thou ascend the bark with the princes at 
thy head ! May thy journey be auspicious : let no delay 
occur !” Thereupon saying , — “So be it !”, and having paid 
homage unto those ascetics, V^wamitra set about crossing 
that river with them, which had replenished the ocean.t And 
it came to pass that while thus engaged, they heard a sound 
augmented by the dashing of the waves.J And having come 
to the middle of the stream, the highly energetic Rlma 
with his younger brother, became curious to ascertain the 
cause of that sound. And reaching the middle of the river, 
Rama asked that best of ascetics, — "What is this loud up- 
roar that seemeth to come. riving the water?” Hearing 
RSghava's words dictated by curiosity, that righteous-souled 
one spake, unfolding the true cause of the noise, — “O 
R5gna, there is in the Kailua mountain an exceedingly 
beautiful pool, created mentally by Brahma, O foremost of 
men, — and hence this watery expanse goeth by the name of 
Manasa Pool . And the stream that issues from that liquid 
lapse, flows thiough Ayodhya : the sacred Sarayu issues 
from that pool of Brahma. And as the Sarayu meets the 
jahnavi, this tremendous uproar is heard, being produced by 
the clashing of the waters. Do thou, O Rlma, bow down 



* Ganges. — T. 

f The legend is that when the saint Agastya had sucked up the ocean, the 
Ganges replenished it.— T. 

X The text has Susrdva — he heard. Another reading is Tatas Susruvatus 
Sab 4am — then they heard a sound, — which I adopt. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKANDAte. 



65 



unto them with a concentrated mind.” Thereupon, both of 
those exceedingly righteous ones, bowed down unto those 
streams ; and betaking themselves to the right bank, began 
to proceed with fleet vigour. And beholding a dreadful 
and trackless forest, that son of the foremost of men, 
Ikshw§ku’s descendant, asked that best of ascetics, saying, — 
“Ah ! deep is this forest abounding in crickets ; and 
filled with terrible ferocious beasts, and various birds possess- 
ed of shocking voices and screaming frightfully ; and graced 
by lions, and tigers, and boars, and elephants ; and crowded 
with Dhavas * and Acwas and Karnas\ and Kukubhas and 
Vi/wasX&nd Ttndukas§ and Pa£alas\\ and Badaris ^ [ Whence 
is this dreadful forest?” Him answered thus the mighty 
ascetic V^wSmitra endowed with high energy, — “Do thou 
listen, O K&kutshtha, as to whom belongeth this dreadful 
forest! Here were formerly, O foremost of men, two 
flourishing provinces, named Malada, and Karusha, built by 
celestial architects. Jn days of yore, O R&ma, on the occa- 
sion of the destruction of Vritra, the thousand-eyed one 
came to have hunger, to be besmeared with excreta, and 
to slay a Brlihmana. And when Indra had been thus 
besmeared, the deities, and the saints having asceticism for 
wealth, washed him here, and cleansed his person from the 
dirt. And the deities, having renounced here the filth that 
had clung unto the person of the mighty Indra, as well as 
his hunger, attained exceeding delight. And thereat Indra 
becoming purified, attained his former brightness, and became 
devoid of hunger. And mightily pleased with this region, he 
conferred on it an excellent boon, saying, — “Since these two 



♦ Grislea Tomentosa. — T. 
t Cassia fistula. — T. 

X Mgle marmalos. — T. 

$ Diospyros glutinosa. — T. 

|| Bignonia suave-olens. — T, 
IT Jujube.— T 

9 



Digitized by 



Google 





66 



KlMlYANA. 



places have held excreta from my body, they going by the 
names of Malada and Karusha, shall attain exceeding pros- 
perity and fame among men.” And beholding the land thus 
honored by the intelligent Sa$ra, the deities said unto the 
subduer of P&ka, — ‘Well 0 “Well !” And, O repressor of 
foes, these two places, Malada and Karusha, enjoyed pros- 
perity for a long lime and were blessed with corn and wealth. 
Then after a space of time, was born a Yakshini capable of 
assuming forms at will, and endowed with the strength of a 
thousand elephants. Her name, good betide thee ! was T£rak2, 
and she was the spouse of the intelligent Sunda — she whose son 
is the R&kshasa, M&richa possessed of the prowess of Sacra ; 
having round arms, with a huge head, a capacious mouth and 
a Cyclopean body. And that Rakshasa of dreadful form daily 
frightens people. And, O descendant of Raghu, T&rakcL of 
wicked deeds, daily commits havoc upon these countries, 
Malada and Karusha . And now at the distance of over half 
a Yojana, she stayeth, obstructing the way. And since this 
forest belongeth unto TSlrakSL, thou shouldst repair thither 
and, resorting to the might of thy own arms, slay this one 
of wicked deeds, And by my direction, do thou again rid 
this region of its thorn ; for no one dareth to approach such 
a place, infested, O Rama, by the dreadful and unbearable 
Yakshini. And now I have related unto thee all about this 
fearful forest. And to this day that Yakshini hath not 
desisted from committing ravages right and left.” 



SECTION XXV. 



FT EARING this excellent speech of that ascetic of im- 
measurable energy, that foremost of men answered him in 
these happy words, — “O best of ascetics, I have heard that 
the Yaksha race is endowed with but small prowess. How 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakXndam. 



67 



can then that one of the weaker sex possess the strength 
of a thousand elephants Y* Hearing this speech that was 
uttered by Raghava of immeasurable energy, Vi^wSmitra, 
delighting with his amiable words that subduer of foes, Rama, 
and Lakshmana, said, — “Do thou listen as to the means 
whereby attaining terrible strength, that one belonging to 
the weaker sex hath come to possess strength and prowess 
by virtue of a boon. In former times there was a mighty 
and exceedingly powerful Yaksha, named Suketu. And he 
had no issue. And he was of pure practices, and used to 
perform rigid austerities. And, O R&ma, the Grand-sire, 
well pleased with that lord of Yakshas, conferred upon him 
a gem of a daughter, by name TarakS. And the Grand-sire 
endowed her with the strength of a thousand elephants ; yet 
that illustrious one did not bestow a son on that Yaksha. And 
when she had grown, and attained youth and beauty, he 
gave that famous damsel unto Jambha's son, Sunda, for wife. 
And after a length of time, that Yakshi gave birth to a son, 
named Maricha, possessed of irrepressible energy — him 
who became a Rakshasa in consequence of a curse. And, O 
Rama, when Sunda had been destroyed, T&raka along wit|i 
her son, set her heart upon afflicting that excellent 
saint Agastya. And enraged with Agastya, she rushed at 
him with a roar, intending to devour him. And on seeing 
her thus rushing, that worshipful saint, Agastya, said unto 
Maricha, “Do thou become a Rakshasa !*', and, in exceeding 
wrath, he also cursed Tarak§. “And, O mighty Yakshi, 
since in frightful guise with a frightful face thou hast desired 
to eat up a human being, do thou immediately leave this 
(thy original) shape, and become of a terrible form ! ” 
Thus cursed by Agastya, TarakS, overwhelmed with rage, 
lays waste this fair region, where Agastya carrieth on his 
austerities. Do thou, O descendant of Raghu, for the welfare 
of Br&hmanas and kine, slay this exceedingly terrible 
Yakshi of wicked ways and vile prowess! Nor, O son of 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




68 



RJlMIYANA. 



Raghu, doth any one in the three worlds, save, thee, dare to 
slay this Yakshi joined with a curse. Nor shouldst thou, O 
best of men, shrink from slaying a woman ; for even this 
should be accomplished by a prince in the interests of the 
four orders. And whether an act be cruel or otherwise, 
slightly or highly sinful, it should for protecting the sub- 
jects, be performed by a ruler. Of those engaged in the oner- 
ous task of government, even this is the eternal rule of 
conduct. Do thou, O Kukutstha, slay this impious one; 
for she knoweth no righteousness ! We hear, O king, 
that in days of yore, Sakra slew Virochana’s daughter, 
Manthar5, who had intented to distroy the earth. And 
formerly, O Rama, Vishnu destroyed K&vya's mother, the 
devoted wife of Bhrigu, who had set her heart upon making 
the world, devoid of Indra. By these as well as innumer- 
able princes — foremost of men — have wicked women been 
slain. Therefore, O king, renouncing antipathy, do thou, by 
my command, slay this one! ,, 



SECTION XXVI. 



Hearing those bold words of the ascetic, the son of 
that foremost of men.Raghava firm in his vows, with clasped 
hands answered, — “In accordance with the desire of my 
sire, and in order to glorify it, I ought fearlessly to do even 
as Ku^ika’s son sayeth. And havingbeen desired to that end 
while at Ayodhyi by that high-souled one, my father Da£a- 
ratha, in the midst of the spiritual guides, I ought not to pass 
by thy words. Therefore, commanded by that upholder of 
the Veda. I, agreeably to rty father's mandate, will, without 
doubt, bring about that welcome event— the death of Tarakl. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakAndam . 



69 

And in the interests of Br£hmanas, kine, and celestials, I 
am ready to act as desired by thee of immeasurable energy.” 
Having said this, that repressor of foes, with clenched fist, 
twanged his bow-string, filling the ten cardinal points with 
the sounds. And at those sounds, the dwellers in Tiraka’s 
forest were filled with perturbation, — and Tarak£ also 
amazed at those sounds, became exceedingly wroth. And, 
rendered almost insensible by anger, that R&kshasi furiously 
rushed in amain towards the spot whence had come the 
report. And beholding that frightful one of hideous visage 
and colossal proportions, transported with rage, Raghu's 
descendant spake unto Lakshmana, — “Behold, O Lakshmana, 
the terrible and hideous body of yonder Yakshini ! The 
sight of her striketh terror into the hearts of even the brave. 
Mark ! . This irrepressible one, possessing all the resources 
of illusion, will I oppose, and deprive her of ears and nose. 
But I dare not slay her, she being protected by virtue of her. 
feminineness. I intend only to oppose her course, and de- 
prive her of her prowess.” As R5ma was speaking thus, 
TSrakS , deprived of sense through ire, uttering roars, with 
uplifted arms rushed against him. And thereat the Brahmar- 
shi, Vi9w&mitra, uttering a roar, upbraided her, and said, — 
“swastil * May victory attend the descendants of Raghu!” 
And raising thick clouds of dust, T&rak& instantly bewildered 
both the descendants of Raghu. And then by help of illu- 
sion, she began to pour upon them a mighty shower of crags. 
And thereat Raghu’s descendant was wroth. And resisting 
that mighty shower of crags by vollies of shafts, RSghava 
with arrows cut off her hands. And with the fore-parts of 
her arms lopped off, as she was roaring before them, 
Sumitra’s son waxing worth deprived her of her ears and 
nose. Therupon that one capable of assuming forms at 
will, began to assume various shapes ; and to vanish from 



• A particle of benediction, indeclinable. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




70 



rAmXyana. 



sight, bewildering her antagonists with her illusory displays. 
And terribly ranging the field, the Yakshi showered crags 
upon her antagonists. And beholding them enveloped on 
all sides by that craggy down-pour, the auspicious son of 
G&dhi spake these words, — “ O Rama, renounce thy anti- 
pathy. This one of wicked ways is exceedingly impious. 
And this sacrifice-disturbing Yakshi will, by virtue of her 
power of illusion, come to increase more and more in energy. 
Do thou, therefore, against the arrival of dusk, slay her ! 
The RSkshasas are incapable of being controlled when even- 
ing sets in. * Thus addressed, Rama, displaying his skill 
in aiming by sounds, enveloped with arrows that Yakshi 
showering crags. Being thus hemmed in with a network cf 
shafts, she possessed of the powers of illusion, rushed 
against KSkutstha and Lakshmana, uttering terrible roars. 
And as that Yakshi, in prowess like unto a thunder-bolt, was 
rushing on, Rama pierced her chest with arrows, — and there- 
at she dropped down and died. And upon seeing that 
grim-visaged one slain, the lord of the celestials together with 
the celestials themselves honoring K&kutstha, exclaimed 
“Well !”, “Well !' 'And exceedingly pleased, the thou- 
sand-eyed Purandara, together with the delighted deities, said 
unto Vi^wimitra, — “ O ascetic, O Ku^ika's son, good betide 
thee ! all the Maruts with Indra at their head, have been 
gratified with this act (of RJLmas). Do thou therefore show 
affection unto RSLghava ! Do thou, O Br&hmana, con- 
fer upon Raghu's descendant the sons of praj£pati Kri- 
C^wa, of true prowess, and charged with ascetic energy. 
And ever following thee, he, O Br&hmana, is fit to receive 
them of thee. And this son of the king is to accomplish a 
mighty task in the interest of the celestials." Saying this, 
the deities, having paid homage unto Vitw&mitra, joyfully 
entered the celestial regions. 

And now came evening on, when that best of ascetics, 
gratified at the destruction of Tarak&, smelt Ram&'s crown 



Digitized by 



Google 




BlLAKlNDAM . 



7 l 



and said these words,— Here O R&ma of gracious pre- 
sence, shall we pass the night; and morrow morning wend unto 
that hermitage of mine. ,, Hearing VicwSmitra’s words, Da9a- 
ratha’s son, glad at heart, happily passed that night in the 
forest of TSrakS. And being thus freed from all disturbances 
from that day forth that forest appeared charming, even 
like unto the forest of Chaitraratha. Having thus slain the 
Yaksha’s daughter, Rama, eulogized by celestials and Stddhas 
spent there that night with the saint, being awakened by the 
latter at the break of day. 



SECTION XXVII. 

> o ^ — 

H.AVING passed that night, the illustrious VigwSmitra, 
smiling complacently sweetly spake unto R5ghava, saying, — 
Pleased am I with thee. Good betide thee, O highly famous 
prince ! With supreme pleasure, do I confer upon thee 
ail the weapons;by means of which subduing such antagonists 
as celestials and Asuras backed on earth by Gandharbas 
and Uragas, thou wilt in battle be crowned with victory. 
And all those celestial weapons, good betide thee, I will 
confer upon thee. And I will confer upon thee, O Raghava, 
the celestial and mighty Dandachakra,* and Dharmachakra, 
and also KSlachakra. And O foremost of men, I will confer 
upon thee the fierce Vishnu Chakra, — and Indra Chakra, 
and the Vajra, and Siva’s Sulavata, and the weapon 
Brahma 9 iras, and Aishika, O mighty-armed descendant 
of Raghu ! And, O best of men, I will, O king’s 

* Chakra means discus. These enumerations specify different kinds of the 
discus. — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 





7 * 



rAmA fan a. 



son, bestow upon thee the matchless Brahma weapon, 
and, O Kakutstha, the two excellent maces, the flaming 
Modaki and Cikhari. And, O Rama, I will confer upon thee 
DharmapS^a,* and Kalapa£a, and the excellent VSrunapS^a. 
And, O descendant of Raghu, I will bestow upon thee the two 
AshantSy — Sushka and Ardra, and the PinSka weapon, and the 
Narayana, and the Agneya weapon called Sikhara, and the 
Vayavya, called Prathama, O sinless one ! And, O Raglia- 
va, I will confer upon thee the weapon called Haya^iras, and 
the Krauncha weapon, and,0 Kakutstha, a couple of darts, 
And I will confer upon the Kankala, and the dreadful Mu- 
shala, and Kapaia, and Kinkini — all those that are intended 
for slaughtering Rakshasas. And, O mighty-armed one, O 
son of the best of men, I will confer upon thee the mighty 
weapon Vidyadhara, and that excellent scimitar named 
Nandana, and the favorite Gandharba weapon, Mohana, 
and Praswlpana, and Pasamana, and Saumya, O Righava ! 
And O best of men, do thou accept Varshana, and 
Soshana, and SantSpana, and Vilapana, and Madana hard 
to repress, beloved of Kandarpa, and that favorite 
Gandharba weapon, MSnava, and the favorite PichSsa 
weapon, O highly famous prince. And do thou, O mighty- 
armed Rama, speedily accept the Tamasa, O best of 
men, and the exceedingly powerful Saumana, and the irrepress- 
ible Samvarta and Maushala, O son’ of the king, and the 
Satya weapon, and the supreme Mayamaya, and the Saura. 
Tejaprabha, capable of depriving foes of energy, and the 
Soma, and the Sisira, and the TSshtra, and the terrible 
Daruna belonging unto Bhaga, and Sileshu, and Madana — 
all assumingforms at will, and endowed with exceeding prow- 
ess, and highly exalted.” Then with his face turned towards 
the east, that foremost of ascetics having purified himself, 
gladly conferred the mantras upon Rama. And the Vipra 

* Pasha means noose, — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



73 



also bestowed upon RSghava those weapons, of which even 
the celestials are incapable of holding all. As that intelligent 
ascetic, Vi^wSmitra, recited mantras , all those invaluable 
weapons appeared before that descendant of Raghu. And, 
with clasped hands, they well-pleased, addressed R&ma, 
— “These, O highly generous one, are. thy servants, O 
R&ghava. And whatever thou wishest, good betide thee, shall 
by all means be accomplished by us.” Thus addressed by 
those highly powerful weapons, KSkutstha Rama, with a 
delighted soul, accepting them, touched them with his hand, 
and said, — “Do ye appear before me as I remember you !” 
Then the exceedingly energetic RJLma, well pleased, paying 
reverence unto the mighty ascetic, Vi^wSmitra, prepared 
to set out. 



SECTION XXVIII. 



H aving accepted those weapons with purity, Kikutstha 
while proceeding, with a complacent countenance spake 
these words unto Vi^wimitra, — “O adorable one, I have 
received these weapons, incapable of being repressed even 
by the celestials themselves. Now, O best of ascetics, I 
would acquire a knowledge of withdrawing them.” Upon 
Kikutstha's representing this, ViswSmitra of high austerities, 
endowed with patience, of excellent vows, and pure in 
spirit, communicated unto him the mantras for restraining the 
weapons. “Do thou,0 R&ma, accept Satyavat, and Sataykirti, 
and Dhrishta, and Rabhasa, and PratihSratara, and 
Par&nmukha, and Av&nmukha, and Lakshya, and Alakshya, 
and DrihanSbha, and Sun&bha, Da^Sksha, and Satavaktra, 
and Da9acirsha, and Satodara, and Padman&bha, and 
MahSn&bha, and Indun&bha, and Swan&bha, and Jyotisha, 
and Sakuna, and NairSshya, and Vimala, and Yaugandhara, 
10 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




74 



RlUlFANA. 



and Vindra, and the two Daityapramathanas, and Suchiv&hu, 
and MahSLvahu, and Nishkali, and Virucha, and Archim&li, 
and Dhritimali, and Vrittiman, and Ruchira, and Pitrya, and 
Saumansa, and Vidhuta, and Makara, and Karavira, and Rati, 
and Dhana, and Dhanya, O Raghava, and Kamarupa, and 
K&maruchi,and Moha, and Avarana,and Jrimbhaka and Sarp- 
anatha, and Panthana, and Varuna, — these sons of Kri^aswa, 
O Rama, effulgent, and assuming shapes at will. And, good 
betide thee, O descendant of Raghu, thou art worthy to 
receive these weapons. ,, Thereupon, KSkutstha with a heart 
overflowing with delight, said, — “So be it !” And those 
weapons were furnished with celestial and shining persons, 
and endowed with visible shapes, and capable of conferring 
happiness. And some of them were like (live) coals ; and 
some comparable unto smoke ; and some were like unto the 
Sun or the Moon. And with folded hands, they spake unto 
Rama in honied accents, — O chief of men, here we are ! 
Do thou command as to what we are to do on thy behalf.” 
Then the descendant of Raghu answered, saying, — “Repair 
whithersoever ye will ! Recurring to my memory, do ye 
in time of need, render me assistance !” Thereupon paying 
homage unto Rama, and having gone round him, they replied 
unto Kakutstha, — “Be it so !”, and returned whence they 
had come. And having learnt all about those weapons, 
Righava, while proceeding spake sweetly unto that mighty 
ascetic, Vi9w&mitra, — “What is yonder wood hard by the hill, 
appearing like clouds ? Great is my curiosity. It is pleasing 
unto the sight, and abounds in beasts, and is exceedingly 
romantic, and is adorned with various birds singing sweetly. 
Now, O foremost of ascetics, we have come out of a wilder- 
ness capable of making one's hair stand on end. And from 
the pleasantness attaching to this place, I have come to a con- 
clusion. Tell me, O reverend sir, whose hermitage is this ? 
where, O eminent ascetic, is that hermitage where dwell 
those wicked-minded wretches of impious deeds, given to 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



75 



slaughtering BrSLhmanas, who disturb thy sacrifice ? Where, 
O adorable one, is that spot, repairing unto which, O 
Br&nmana, I am to protect thy sacrificial rites, and to slay 
the Rakshasas ? All this, O foremost of ascetics, I desire to 
hear, O lord.” 



SECTION XXIX. 



"FT EARING those words of RSma of measureless prowess, 
who had asked the question, the highly energetic V^wamitra 
answered, saying, — "Here, O mighty-armed Rama, Vishnu 
of mighty asceticism worshipped of all the deities, for years 
upon years, and hundreds of Yugas , dwelt for carrying on 
his austerities and Yoga . This, O Rama, was formerly the 
hermitage of the high-souled VSmana. And this is famed as 
Siddh§ 9 rama, in consequence of that one of potent asceticism 
having attained fruition there. And it came to pass that at 
this time Virochana’s son, king Vali, having vanquished 
the celestials with Indra and the Maruts, established that 
dominion of his, famous in the three worlds. And that 
mighty chief of the Asuras celebrated a sacrifice. And as 
Vali was performing that sacrifice, the deities with Agni at 
their head, coming unto Vishnu himself at this asylum, 
addressed him, saying, — “Virochana's son, Vali, O Vishnu, is 
celebrating a sacrifice. Do thou, before the ceremoney is 
finished, accomplish thy own end. He duly conferreth # upon 
such as repair unto him from various quarters all those things 
that they ask for. And do thou thyself, O Vishuu, aided by 
thy power of illusion, assuming a Dwarf-form, accomplish the 
welfare (of the celestials.)” In the meantime, O RSma, the 
wonderful Ka9yapa resembling fire in splendour, and flaming 
in energy, having in company with, and with the assistance 
of, the divine Aditi, O R2ma, accomplished his vow, lasting 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




76 



rAmXyana. 



for hundred years, began to hymn the destroyer of Madbu 
ready to confer boons. “By means of warm austerities, do I 
behold thee composed of penances, a mass of mortifications, 
and endowed with a form and a soul of austerities. And 
in thy person, O lord, do I behold this entire universe. 
And in Thee without beginning, and incapable of being 
pointed out, do I take refuge V' Thereupon exceedingly 
pleased, Hari spake unto Ka 9 yapa, with his sins purged off 
saying, — “Do thou mention the boon ! Good betide thee. 
Methinks thou deservest a boon/ 1 Hearing these words of 
his, Marichi’s son, I<a9yapa, said, — “Aditi, the gods and 
I myself, crave of thee this, —and, O bestower of boons, it 
behoveth thee well pleased to confer on us this boon, O thou 
of excellent vows ! Do thou, O sinless one, become born 
as my son in Aditi, O adorable deity ! Do thou become the 
younger brother of Sakra, O destroyer of Asuras. It behoveth 
thee to help the celestials afflicted with grief. And this 
place through thy grace will attain the name of Siddh&9rama. 
The work, O lord of the celestials, hath been accomplished. 
Do thou now, O thou of the six attributes, ascend from 
hence !” And accordingly Vishnu of mighty energy took 
his birth in Aditi. And assuming the form of a dwarf, he 
presented himself before Virochana's son. And then asking 
for as much earth as could be covered by three footsteps, 
that one ever engaged in the welfare of all creatures, with 
the object of compassing the good of all, stood occupying 
the worlds. And having by his power restrained Vali, 
that one of exceeding energy, again conferred the three 
worlds upon the mighty Indra, — and made them subject to 
his control. Formerly he used to dwell in this asylum capa- 
ble of removing fatigue. And through reverence for the 
Dwarf, I reside here. And this hermitage is infested by 
R&kshasas disturbing rites. And, O most puissant of men, 
here thou shouldst slay those ones of wicked ways. To-day, 
O Rftma, will 1 repair unto this supremely excellent 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM . 



77 



SiddhS^rama. And this asylum, child, is as much thine as 
mine.” Saying this, taking Rama and Lakshmana, the mighty 
ascetic, experiencing exceeding delight, entered that asylum, 
and appeared graceful, like the Moon emerged from mist in 
conjunction with the Punarvasu stars. And beholding 
Vl^wSmitra, the ascetics inhabiting Siddhl^rama, suddenly 
rising in joy, worshipped that intelligent one, — and extended 
unto the princes the rites of hospitality. And then having 
reposed for while, those unreproved princes, the descend- 
ants of Raghu, with clasped hands, addressed that foremost of 
ascetics, — “Be thou even to-day initiated unto the ceremony. 
Good betide thee, O best of ascetics ! Let this Siddha^rama 
verily attain fruition, — and let thy words be verified!” 
Thus addressed, that mighty saint of exceeding energy, 
with his mind subdued, and senses under restraint, caused 
himself to be initiated into the ceremony. And like unto 
the Kumaras,* RSma and Lakshamana, having passed the 
night pleasantly, rose in the morning ; and having finished 
their morning worship, and with purity and self-restraint 
recited the prime mantras , paid their obeisance unto 
the sacrificial fire and the sacrificer, Vi^wamitra, who was 
seated. 



SECTION xxx. 



Then those princes, repressors of foes, cognizant of place, 
and time, and words, thus spake unto Ru^ka's son agree- 
ably to time and place, saying, — “O adorable one do thou 
tell us as to the time when we should oppose those rangers 
of the night I Let not that hour pass away t” Upon the two 
K&kutsthas’ saying this, and finding them prompt for the en- 

* Skanda and Visakha. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




78 



RlMlyANA. 



counter, those ascetics well-pleased, fell to extolling the sons 
of the king. “For six nights from to-day, ye should protect us. 
This ascetic hath been initiated into the sacrifice, and must 
therefore, observe taciturnity.” Hearing these words of 
theirs, those illustrious princes, renouncing sleep, began to 
guard the hermitage six days and nights ; and those heroic and 
mighty archers with their armours on protected that best of 
ascetics and subduer of enemies. And when time had thus 
gone by and the sixth day had arrived, Rama said unto 
Sumitra’s son, — “Being well equipped, be thou vigilant !” 
When Rama, manifesting emotion, and being eager for 
encounter, had said this, the priests and spiritual guides lit 
up the altar. And along with Viywamitra and the family 
priests, they lit up the altar furnished with Ku^a, and K59a, 
and ladles, and faggots, and flowers. And as reciting mantras , 
they were about to duly engage in that sacrifice, there arose 
a mighty and dreadful uproar in the sky. And as in the rains, 
masses of clouds appear enveloping the firmament,* the 
Rakshasas, displaying illusions in that wise, began to rush 
onward. And Maricha and Suvahu together with their follow- 
ers coming in dreadful forms, began to shower down blood 
upon the altar. And on seeing the altar deluged with gore, 
Rama suddenly rushed forward, and beheld’ them in the sky. 
And suddenly seeing them rushing in amain, the lotus-eyed 
Rama fixing his gaze at Lakshmana, said, — “Behold, O 
Lakshmana, by means of a Manava weapon, I shall, without 
doubt, drive away the wicked, flesh-eating Rakshasas, even 
as the wind driveth away clouds before it. Surely I cannot 
bring myself to slay such as these.” Saying this, that descen- 
dant of Raghu, Rama, in vehemence fixing on his bow an 
exceedingly mighty and gloriously-dazzling Manava weapon, 



♦ The text reads, gamanam avaryya — obstructing passage. Evidently the 
reading is vicious — it should run gaganam avaryya — enveloping the firma- 
ment. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BlLAKXNDAM. 



79 



discharged it in great wrath at Maricha’s chest. And 
wounded by that foremost of Manava weapons, Maricha carried 
off a sheer hundred Yojanas , dropped in the midst of the 
ocean. And finding MSricha senseless, and whirling, and 
afflicted by the might of the weapon, and overcome, Rama 
addressed Lakshmana, saying, — “Behold, O Lakshmana, this 
Manava weapon first used by Manu, depriving him of his 
senses, hath carried him off, — and yet hath not taken his 
life ! But thSse shameless, wicked, and blood-drinking 
R§kshasas, addicted to wrong-doing, these disturbers of 
sacrifices, will I slaughter.” Having said this, anon showing 
unto Lakshmana his lightness of hand, Raghu’s descendant 
took out a mighty Agneya weapon, and discharged it at the 
breast of Suv&hu. Thereat being pierced with that shaft, 
he fell down upon the ground. Then taking a VSyavaya 
weapon, the illustrious and exceedingly generous RSghava, 
bringing delight unto those ascetics, slew the rest. And 
having destroyed all those RSkshasas disturbing sacrifices, 
Raghu’s descendant was honored by the saints, even as Indra 
in days of yore, after having vanquished the Asuras. And when 
the sacrifice had been completed, the mighty ascetic Vi^wa- 
mitra, beholding all sides cleared of Rakshasas, spake unto 
K&kutstha, saying, — “O mighty-armed one, I have obtained my 
desire ; and thou hast executed thy preceptor's mandate. 
And, O illustrious hero, thou hast truly made this a Siddha- 
^rama.” Having thus extolled Rama, he took R&ma and 
Lakshmana, to perform his evening devotions. 



SECTION XXXI . 



Those heroes, Rlma and Lakshmana, their interest 
secured, with glad hearts passed that night there. And when 
the night had passed away and the morning come, they 
together appeared before the saint, Viywamitra, and the rest. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




8o 



RlMlYANA . 



And having saluted that foremost of ascetics resembling flam- 
ing fire, they of honied speech spake unto him words exceed- 
ingly lofty. — “These servants of thine, O best of ascetics, have 
cpme before thee. Do thou command, O chief of anchorets, 
what command of thine are we to execute ?” Thus addressed 
by them, the Maharshis with Visw^mitra at their head spake 
unto Rama, saying, — “A highly meritorious sacrifice, O fore- 
most of men, is to be celebrated by Mithil&’s lord, Janaka. 
Thither shall we repair. And thou, O great among men, 
must accompany us, and there behold a wonderful jewel 
of a bow. And formerly this bow of immeasurable energy, 
and dreadful, and exceedingly effulgent at the sacrifice, had 
been conferred in court by the celestials (on king Devar&ta). 
And neither gods nor Gandharbas, neither Asuras nor 
R&kshasas nor men, can fix the string upon it. And 
desirous of being acquainted with the prowess of this 
bow, many kings and princes came ; but they in spite of 
their mighty strength, failed in stringing it. There, O 
K&kutstha, thou wilt behold that bow belonging to the 
high-souled king of Mithila, — as well as his exceedingly 
wonderful sacrifice. That rare bow, O foremost of men, 
furnished with an excellent device for griping it, had been so- 
licited by Mithila’s lord as the fruit of his sacrifice ; and the 
celestials conferred it uppn him. And now, O descendant 
of Raghu, in the residence of king, the bow is worship- 
ped like a deity with aguru , dhupa , and various other in- 
censes/ 1 This having been said, that foremost of ascetics, 
in company with KSkutstha and the saints, departed. And 
on the eve of setting out, he addressed the sylvan deities, 
saying, — “Luck ! I will, with my desire obtained, go 
from forth this Siddh&^rama unto the Himavat mountain on 
the north of the JShnavi.” Having said this, that tiger-like 
ascetic, Ku^ka’s son, along with Other anchorets having 
asceticism for their wealth, set out in a northerly direction. 
And as that best of ascetics proceeded, he was followed by 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



Si 



Brahmanas upholding the Veda, carry ing the sacrificial neces- 
saries on an hundred cars. And birds and beasts dwelling in 
Siddhl^rama followed the high-souled V^wSmitra having asce- 
ticism for wealth. And then followed by the body of devotees 
he dismissed the birds. And having proceded a longway, when 
the sun was sloping down, the ascetics rested on the banks of 
the Sona. And when the maker of day had set, having bathed 
and offered oblations unto the fire, those ascetics of immeasur- 
able energy, placing V^wamitra in their front, sat them down. 
And Rama also together with Sumitra’s son, having paid 
homage unto those ascetics, sat him down before the intelli- 
gent V^wamitra. Then Rama of exceeding energy, 
influenced by curiosity, asked that foremost of ascetics, 
Vi9w2Lmitra, having asceticism for his wealth / saying, — “O 
worshipful one, what country is this, graced with luxuriant 
woods ? I am desirous of hearing this. Good betide thee, 
it behoveth thee to tell me this truly.” Thus addressed by 
Rama, that one of high austerities and excellent vows began 
in the midst of the saints to describe the oppulence of that 
region. 



SECTION xxxn. 

:0 ° : 

V/NCE upon a time there was a mighty son of Brahma, 
of high austerities, named Ku9a. And he was cognizant 
of duty, and ever engaged in observing vows and honoring 
good men. And that high-souled one begat on Vaidarbhi, 
sprung from a respectable line, and endowed with all noble 
qualities, four sons like unto himself, and possessed of 
extraordinary prowess — Ku9amva, and Ku9anabha, and 
Asurtarajas, and Vasu, resplendent and breathing exhaust- 
less spirits. And with the deisre of enhancing Kshetrya 
merit, Ku9a said unto his truthful and virtuous sons, — ‘Ye 
sons ! do ye engage in the task of governing, — and thereby 
acquire -immense merit.’ Hearing Kuja’s words, those four 
ii 



Digitized by LiOOQle 




82 



RllUAYANA. 



foremost of men and best of sons addressed themselves to 
founding seats for their government. And the highly 
energetic Ku^mva founded the city of Kau^mvi ; and the 
righteous Kusanabha, the metropolis of Mahodaya; and 
the magnanimous Asurtarajas, Dharm^ranya ; and king 
Vasu, Girivraja, best of capitals. This city with these five 
mighty mountains shining around (otherwise) called Vasumati 
belongs to the high-souled Vasu. And the river known by 
the name of Sumagadhi flows through the Magadhas. And 
in the midst of the five foremost of hills, it looks like a 
garland. And this MSgadhi, O R&ma, belongs unto the high- 
souled Vasu, taking, O RSma, an easterly course, and flowing 
through fertile fields furnished with corn. And, O descend- 
ant of Raghu, the virtuous-souled RSjarshi Ku9an&bha begat 
an hundred peerless daughters on GhritSchi. And it came to 
pass that they endowed with youth, beautiful, and like unto 
the lightning in the rainy season, decked in excellent orna- 
ments, coming to their garden, were merrily singing and 
dancing and playing on musical instruments, O R&ghava ! And 
as they perfect in every limb, and unparalleled on earth in 
beauty, and endowed with all qualities, and furnished with youth 
and grace, were in the garden, like unto stars embosomed 
among clouds, that life of all, the air, beheld them and said, — 
*1 seek for ye : do ye become my wives. Do ye renounce this 
human guise, and attain long lives. Youth verily is unstable, 
specially with the human beings : do ye attaining unfading 
youth, become immortal Hearing this speech of the Air of 
ever fresh energy, the damsels ridiculing it, said, — 4 Thou 
rangest the hearts of all creatures, O foremost of celestials, 
and we also know thy influence. Wherefore, then, dost 
thou dishonor us ? O foremost- of celestials, we are the 
daughters of Ku£an&bha, O divine one. And god as thou 
art, we can dislodge thee from thy place ; but we refrain 
from doing so, lest thereby we lose our ascetic merit. May, 
O foolish one, that time never come, w f hen disregarding 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bIlakXndam . 



83 



oar truthful sire, we following our inclination, shall resort 
to self choice. Our father verily is our lord and prime god. Of 
him even shall we become the wives unto whom our father 
giveth us away/ At these words of theirs, that lord and adora- 
ble one, the Air, exceedingly enraged, then entered into their 
bodies, and broke all their limbs. Their bodies being thus 
broken by Air, those damsels, exceedingly agitated and over- 
whelmed with shame, with tears in their eyes entered the 
residence of the king. And finding his supremely beautiful 
and favorite daughters with their limbs broken, and woe- 
begone, the king bewildered, spake, — Ye daughters, what 
is this? Who is it that thus disregards virtue? By 
whom have ye all come by this crooked form ? And why 
demonstrating your grief, do ye not answer me ?' Having 
said this, the king heaved a deep sigh and became eager 
to hear all about it.” 



SECTION x x x 1 1 1 . 



H earing those words of the intelligent Ku^an&bha, 
his hundred daughters touching his feet with their heads, said, 
— ‘O king, that life of all, the Air, was desirous of overcoming 
us, having recourse to an improper way ; nor did he regard 
morality. — We have a father, good betide thee ; and have no 
will of our own. Do thou ask our father about it, if he con- 
sent conferring us on thee. — But that wicked wight did not 
listen to our words ; and as we were saying this, were we 
roughly handled by him.' Hearing those words of theirs, the 
highly pious and puissant king addressed his hundred beauti- 
ful daughters, saying, — ‘Ye have displayed a signal example 
of that forgiveness which is fit to be followed by the forbear- 
ing; and that ye have unanimously regarded the honor of 
nay house, also conduces to your praise. Alike to men and 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




84 



rAmAfana. 



women, forbearance is an ornament. And difficult it is for 
one to exercise that forbearance, specially in respect of the 
celestials. And may every descendant of mine possess for- 
bearance like unto yours ! Forbearance is charity ; forbearance 
is truth ; forbearance, O daughters, is sacrifice ; forbearance 
is fame ; forbearance is virtue, — yea, the universe is establish- 
ed in forbearance.' Then dismissing his daughters, the king 
endowed with the prowess of celestials, and versed in counsel, 
began to consult with his counsellors about the bestowal 
of his daughters in respect of time and place and person 
and equality of lineage. And it came to pass that at this 
time an ascetic named Chuli, highly effulgent, with his vital 
fluid under control, and of pure practices, was performing 
Brahmya austerities. And as the saint was engaged in 
austerities, good betide thee, Urmila's daughter named 
Somada — a Gandharbi — ministered unto him. And in all 
humility that virtuous one for a definite period was engaged 
in ministering unto him. And thereat, her spiritual guide 
w r as gratified with her. And, O descendant of Raghu, once 
he said unto her, — ‘I am gratified good betide thee ! What 
good shall I render thee? Thereupon, concluding that the 
ascetic was gratified, the Gandharbi, cognizant of words, 
exceedingly delighted, sweetly addressed that one versed 
in speech, — ‘Thou art furnished with the Brahmya fire, art like 
BrahmS himself, and of mighty austerities. 1 desire of thee 
a righteous son endowed with the Brahmya ascetic virtues. 
1 am without a husband, good betide thee, and I am no one's 
wife. Upon me who am thy servant, thou shouldst confer 
such a son by help of Brahmya means/ Thereupon, well 
pleased with her, the Brahmarshi Chulina conferred upon her 
an excellent Brahmya mind-begotten son, named Brahma- 
datta. And that king, Brahmadatta, founded the flourishing 
city of Kampilya,even as the sovereign of the celestials found- 
ed the celestial regions. And, O Kakutstha, the righteous 
king Kucanabha finally decided on conferring his hundred 



Digitized by 



Google 




bXla kXsda m. 



*5 

diug uers upon Brahmadatta. And inviting Brahmadatta 
that highly energetic lord of earth, with a glad heart 
conferred his hundred daughters upon him. And, O des- 
cendant of Raghu, king Brahmadatta resembling the lord 
himself of the celestials, by turns received their hands in 
marriage. And as soon as he touched them, the hundred 
daughters were cured of their crookedness, and became free 
from anguish, and were endowed with pre-eminent beauty. 
And upon beholding them delivered from (the tyranny of) the 
Air, the monarch Ku^anabha became exceedingly delighted, 
and rejoiced again and again. And he dismissed the newly 
married lord of earth, king Brahmadatta, in company with his 
consorts and the priests. And the Gandharbf Som&dS 
rejoiced exceedingly at the completion of the nuptials of her 
son ; and embracing her daughters-in-law again and again, 
and extolling her son, she expressed the fulness of her joy.” 



SECTION xxxiv. 



A 

XjLND, O RSghava, when Brahmadatta was married, that 
sonless one, (Ku^anSbha), with the intention of obtaining 
male offspring, took in hand a son-conferring sacrifice. And 
when the sacrifice had commenced, that son of BrahmJL, the 
exceedingly noble Ku^a, spake unto king Ku^anSbha, saying, 
— ‘O son, there will be born unto thee a virtuous son like 
unto thyself : thou wilt obtain even Gadhi, — and through 
him enduring fame in this world.’ Having said this unto 
king Ku9anabha 9 Ku^a, O R5ma, entering the welkin, 
went to the eternal regions of BrahmS. Then after some- 
time, an eminently virtuous son, named GSdhi, was born 
unto the intelligent Ku9an£bha. O K&kutstha, even that 
highly pious G&dhi is my sire. And, O descendant of Raghu 
I, called Kau9ika, am sprung from Ku9a's line. And, O 



Digitized by Go ogle 




86 



xAmAyana. 



RSghava, I had a sister of noble vows born before me. And 
her name was Satyavati ; and she was bestowed upon 
Richika. And following her lord, she ascended heaven in 
her own proper person. And my highly generous sister, 
Kau9iki, hath finally assumed the form of a mighty river. 
And in order to compass the welfare of all creatures, my 
sister is now a noble and charming river of sacred waters, 
issuing from the Himavat mountains. And thenceforth, out 
of affection for my sister, Kou^iki, I ever dwell happily in the 
vicinity of the Himavat, O Raghava. And that virtuous 
Kau9iki, Satyavati, as well established in religion as 
truth, and chaste, and eminently pious, is now the foremost 
of streams. And, O Rama it is only for the purpose of com- 
pleting my sacrifice that leaving her behind, I have come 
to Siddha9rama. And now by virtue of thy energy, have 
I attained frution. Now, O R&ma, I have narrated unto 
thee the circumstances connected with the history of my 
line and myself, as also of this place, O mighty armed 
one, — which thou hadst asked me to relate. But, O Kakut- 
stha, while I was speaking, half the night hath been spent. 
Do thou now sleep, good betide thee, — so that thou mayst not 
feel any difficulty while on the journey. The trees stand 
motionless, and the beasts and birds are silent, and, O descend- 
ant of Raghu, all sides have become enveloped in nocturnal 
gloom. The midnight is gradually passing away ; and 
the firmament thick-studded with stars resembling eyes, is 
illumined up with their light. And that dispeller of dark- 
ness, the milcF-beaming moon, is rising, gladdening the 
hearts of all creatures with his splendour. And night-rang- 
ing beings — terrible carnivorous Yakshas and P&kshasas — 
walk hither and thither.” Having said this, the mighty 
ascetic of exceeding energy paused. And those ascetics 
honoring him, said, — “ Excellent ! Excellent ! This 
line belonging to the Ku9*ikas is ever exalted and devoted to 
virtue, And those foremost of men sprung in the Ku9a 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakAndam. 



8 7 



race are high-souled and like unto Brahmarshis — and 
specially thou, O illustrious VicvvSniitra, art so. And that 
best of streams, Kau^iki, hath added lustre unto thy line.” 
and the auspicious son of Ku9ika having been extolled by 
those delighted ascetics— the foremost of their order — slept, 
like unto the sun, when setting. And Rama too along with 
Sumitra’s son having in admiration praised that best of 
ascetics, enjoyed the luxury of slumber. 



SECTION xxxv. 



Having in company with the ascetics passed the re- 
mainder of the night on the banks of the Sona, V^wSmitra, 
when the day broke, spake, — “O RSlma, the night hath pass- 
ed away, and the morn hath come. The hour for performing 
the prior devotions hath arrived. Arise ! arise ! good betide 
thee i Do thou prepare for going.” Hearing these words 
of his, Rama, having finished his morning devotions and 
rites, and ready for departure said, — ‘‘This is the Sona, of ex- 
cellent waters, fathomless, and studded with islets. O Brah- 
mana, by which way shall we cross ?” Thus addressed by 
R&ma, Vi9wamitra replied, — “Even this path hath been fixed 
upon by me, — that, namely, which the Maharsais go.” 
And having proceeded far, when the day had been half spent 
they beheld that foremost of streams, the Jahnavi, worshipped 
by ascetics. And having beheld that river furnished with 
sacred waters, and frequented by swans and cranes, the 
ascetics who accompanied Raghava were exceedingly de- 
lighted. And they took up their quarters on the banks of 
the river. And then having bathed and duly offered obla- 
tions of water unto the gods and the manes of their ances- 
tors, and performed Agnihotra* sacrifices, and partaken of 

* Sacrifice with burnt offering — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




88 



RlMlYANA. 



clarified butter like unto nectar, those high-souled and aus- 
picious ones, with glad hearts, sat down, surrounding 
V^wSmitra. And the descendants of Raghu also sat down, 
occupying prominent places as befitted their rank. Then 
R3ima with a heart surcharged with cheerfulness spake unto 
Vi9w5mitra, saying, — “O adorable one, I desire to hear how 
the Ganga flowing in three directions and embracing the 
three worlds, falls into the lord of streams and rivers.” 
Influenced by Rama’s speech, the mighty ascetic Viywamitra 
entered upon the history of the Ganges origin and progress, 
*• O Rama, that great mine of ore, Himavat is the foremost 
of mountains. Unto him were born two daughters, unpar- 
alleled on earth in loveliness. And, O Rama, their mother 
of dainty waist, the amiable daughter of Meru, named Meni, 
was the beloved wife of Himavat — she of whom was born 
Ganga the elder daughter of Himavat ; and, O Raghava, a 
second daughter was also born unto him, named Uma. And 
it came to pass that once upon a time, the deities, with the 
view of accomplishing some work appertaining to them as 
divine beings, in a body besought that foremost of mountains 
for that river flowing in three directions, Ganga. Thereupon, 
desirous of the welfare of the three worlds, Himavat in 
obedience to duty, conferred upon them his daughter 
flowing everywhere at will, and sanctifying all creatures. 
Thereat in the interests of the three worlds, accepting her, 
those having the welfare of the three worlds at heart, went 
away with Ganga, considering themselves as having attained 
their desire. The other daughter of the mountain, O descend- 
ant of Raghu, adopting a stern vow, began to carry on austeri- 
ties, having asceticism for her wealth. And that best of 
mountains bestowed upon Rudra of unequalled form his 
daughter Uma, furnished with fiery asceticism, and worship- 
ped of the worlds. And these, O Raghava, are the daugh- 
ters of that king of mountains, worshipped of all, vis., Ganga, 
the foremost of streams, and the divine Uma. Now, O best 




bAlakAndam. 



£9 

of those endowed with motion, have I related unto thee how 
that sin-destroying one flowing with her waters in three 
diverse directions, first, O child, went to the firmament and 
then ascended the celestial regions.” 



SECTION XXXVI. 

W HEN the ascetic had spoken thus, both the heroes, 
R§ma and Lakshmana, saluting that first of anchorets, said,— 
“O Brahmana, thou hast delivered this noble narration 
fraught with morality. Now it behoves thee to speak about 
the elder daughter of the mountain-king. Thou art exten- 
sively conversant with everything relative to men or gods. 
Why is it that that purifier of the worlds laveth three direc- 
tions ? And why is that foremost of streams, GangS, famous 
as wending in three ways ? And, O thou cognizant of mora- 
lity, what are her performances in the three worlds ?” There- 
at Vi^wamitra having asceticism for his wealth, began to 
relate unto Kakutstha that history in detail in the midst of 
the ascetics. ‘In days of yore, O Rama, the blue-throated 
one of mighty asceticism, having entered into matrimony, 
commenced upon knowing the goddess. And as that in- 
telligent blue-throated god, Mahadeva, was thus engaged in 
sport, a devine hundred years passed away; and yet, O Rama, 
chastiser of foes, no son was born of her. Thereat all the 
gods with the Grand sire at their head became exceedingly 
anxious. “Who will be able to bear the offspring of this 
union ?” And thereupon the celestials repairing unto Mah&- 
deva, thus addressed him, saluting low, — *'0 god of gods, 
O mighty deity, ever engaged in the welfare of all, it be- 
hoveth thee to be propitious at the humble salutations of 
the celestials. The worlds, O foremost of celestials, are in- 
12 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




90 



RlMlYANA . 



capable of bearing thy energy. Therefore, for the welfare 
of the three worlds, do thou, being furnished with Brahm& 
asceticism, in company with the goddess practise austerities, 
and rein in thy energy by thy native indomitableness. Do 
thou preserve these worlds ; for it becometh thee not to des- 
troy all/ Hearing the words of the deities, the great god of 
the worlds said unto them, — ‘So be it !' And addressing them 
again he said,— ‘Ye gods, by my own energy I will assisted 
by Um2L bear my virile vigour,— therefore let the creation 
find rest I But tell me, ye foremost of celestials, who will 
sustain my potent virility rushing out from its receptacle ?' 
Being thus addressed, the gods answered him having the 
bull for his mark, — ‘The earth will to-day bear thy vital flow.’ 
Thus assured, the mighty lord of the celestials let go his 
vital fluid $ and thereat the earth containing mountains and 
forests was overspread with the energy. Then the gods spake 
unto the Fire, saying, — ‘Do thou in company with the Wind 
enter into this fierce and mighty energy! 1 And when the Wind 
had entered into it, it was developed into a white hill, and a 
forest of glossy reeds, resembling fire or the Sun. And here 
sprang from Fire Kartikeya of mighty energy. And there- 
upon the celestials and the saints, with gratified hearts, began 
to pay enthusiastic adorations unto Um2L aud SivSL Then 
the Mountain's daughter, O RSma, addressed the celestials, 
cursing them with eyes reddened in wrath, — ‘While in asso- 
ciation with Mahadeva for obtaining sons, 1 was broken in 
upon by ye, — for this, ye shall not be able yourselves to be- 
get offspring on your wives. And from this day forth, your 
wives shall remain without issue.' Having thus spoken unto 
the celestials, she cursed the Earth also, saying, — ‘O Earth, 
thou shalt have various forms, and many shall lord it over 
thee ! Nor, stained because of my ire, shalt thou experience 
the pleasure that is felt on obtaining a son, O thou of wicked 
understanding, O thou that dost not wish me a son V Wit- 
nessing the gods thus distressed, the lord of the celestials 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM . 



9i 



set out in the direction presided over by Varuna.* And 
having repaired to the north side of that mountain.t Mahe- 
swara along with the goddess became engaged in austerities 
on the peak Himavatprabhava. I have now related unto thee, 
O Rama, the spread of the Mountain’s daughter, (GangSL). 
Do thou now together with Lakshmana listen to the narration 
of BhSgirathi’s potency 



SECTION XXXVII. 



« A 

jtiLND on that celestial being engaged in austerities, 
the deities with Indra and Agni at their head, desirous of 
gaining over the generalissimo, appeared before the Grand- 
sire. And, O Rama, the gods with Agni at their head, 
bowing unto him, addressed that possessor of the six attri- 
butes, the Grand-sire, saying, — *0 God, that adorable one 
who had formerly consigned unto us the generalissimo, re- 
sorting to high asceticism, is practising austerities with UmS. 
Do thou now, O thou conversant with resources, so order as 
is advisable in the interests of the worlds ! Verily thou art 
our prime way. 1 Hearing the words of the deities, the Grand- 
sire of all creatures, consoling them with soft words, spoke 
unto them, saying, — ‘Even as the Mountain’s daughter hath 
said, sons will not be born unto ye of your own wives. Her 
word is infallible of a certainty : there is no doubt about it. 
This is the celestial GangSL — she on whom HutSLsanaJ will 
beget a son — the foe-subduing generalissimo of the celestials. 
And the elder daughter of the Mountain will consider that 
son as brought forth by Uma ; and Uma also will, without 

~ ~ ~ * The West.— T. 

t The Himalaya. — T. 

% Fire.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





9 * 



rAmXyana. 



doubt, look upon him with regard. 1 Hearing these words 
of his, O descendant of Raghu, the gods bowing unto the 
Grand-sire, paid him homage. Then, O Rama, repairing unto 
the Kaila^a mountain teeming with metals, the deities com- 
missioned Agni with the view of having a son (born unto him.) 
‘Do thou, O god, accomplish this work of the deities ! O thou 
of mighty energy, do thou discharge thy energy into that 
daughter of the mountain, Ganga.’ Thereupon giving his pro- 
mise unto the gods, Pavaka* approached Ganga, saying, — 
‘Do thou, O Goddess, bear an embryo ; for even this is the 
desire of the deities.’ Hearing this speech, she assumed a 
divine appearance. And beholding her mightiness, Agnt 
was shrunk up on all sides. And then Pavaka from all sides 
discharged his energy into her,— and thereat all her streams 
became surcharged with it, O descendant of Raghu. And 
unto him staying at the head of all the deities, GangS spoke, 
saying, — ‘O god, I am incapable of sustaining this new- 
sprung energy of thine : I am burning with that fire, and 
my consciousness fails me.’ Thereupon that partaker of 
the oblations offered unto the gods, said unto Ganga, — ‘Do 
thou bring forth thy embryo on the side of this Himavat !’ 
Hearing Agni’s words, Ganga of mighty energy cast her 
exceedingly effulgent embryo on her streams, O sinless one. 
And as it came out of her, it wore the splendour of molten 
gold ; and in consequence of its fiery virtue, objects near and 
objects far were converted into gold and silver of un- 
surpassed sheen, — while those that were more distant were 
turned into copper and iron. And her excreta were turned 
into lead. In this wise, various metals began to increase on 
earth. And as soon as the embryo was brought forth, the 
woods adjoining the mountain, being overspread with that 
energy, were turned into gold. And from that day, O descend- 
ant of Raghu, gold of effulgence like unto that of fire, became 



♦ Fire.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BALA KIND AM. 



93 



known as Jatarupa, O foremost of men ! And when the son 
was born, the deities with Indra and the Maruts enjoined 
upon the Kirtika stars to suckle him. ‘Surely he shall be son 
unto us all’ — concluding thus, they as soon as he was born, 
by turns began to dispense milk unto him. Then the celes- 
tials called him Kartikeya, saying, — ‘Without doubt, this 
son shall become famed over the three worlds.* And hearing 
those words of theirs, the Kirtikas bathed the offspring that had 
issued from her womb, flaming like fire, and with auspicious 
marks. And, O Kakutstha, since K&rtikeya had issued from 
(Ganga's) womb, the celestials called that effulgent and 
mighty-armed one, Skanda.* And then the teats of the 
Kritikas were filled with milk ; and thereupon assuming 
six mouths, he began to suck milk from the teats of those 
six. And having drunk the milk, that lord although then 
possessed of a tender frame, by virtue of his inborn prowess 
in one day vanquished the Danava forces. And him 
possessed of mighty effulgence, the celestials assembled 
with Agni as their leaner sprinkled with water, by way of 
installing him as their generalissimo. He who, O Kakutstha, 
on earth revereth Kartikeya, is blessed, and attaineth 
righteousness, and being long-lived and obtaining sons and 
grand-sons, repaireth to the regions of Skanda.*' 



SECTION xxxviii. 



H aving said those words unto Rama, composed of 
melodious letters, Kaugika again spoke unto Kakutstha, say- 
ing, — “Formerly there was a king — lord of Ayodhya-named 
Sagara. And it came to pass that righteous one, though eagerly 
wishing for children, was without issue. And Vidharbha's 

* Skanna means issuing from, — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 




94 



RXMlFANA. 



daughter, O R3ma, named Ke9ini,was the elder wife of Sagara. 
And she was virtuous and truthful. And the second wife of 
Sagara w f as called Sumati, who was the daughter of 
Arishtanemi and the sister of Suparna * And with those 
wives of his, that mighty king, coming to the Himavat, began to 
practise austerities on the mountain Bhriguprasravana. And 
when a full hundred years had been numbered, the ascetic that 
had been adored by means of these austerities, Brighu,best of 
those endowed with truth, conferred a boon upon Sagara, say- 
ing, — 'O sinless one, thou shalt obtain glorious offspring ; 
and, O foremost of men, thou shalt attain unparalleled renown 
among men. And, O child, one of thy consorts shall bring 
forth a son who will perpetuate thy race ; and the other 
give birth to sixty thousand sons. 1 As that best of men was 
saying this, those daughters of kings, exceedingly delighted, 
propitiating him, addressed him with clasped hands, 
— *Who of us, O Brahmana, shall produce a single son, 
and who many ? This, O Br&hmana, we wish to hear. May 
thy word prove true f Hearing this, the highly pious 
Bhrigu said these pregnant words, — ‘Do ye unfold your 
minds. Who wishes for what boon, — between a single 
perpetuator of the line, and innumerable sons, possessed 
of mighty strength, and furnished with fame, and endowed 
with high spirits ?’ Hearing the ascetic’s words, O des- 
cendant of Raghu, Ke9ini in the presence of the monarch 
chose, O Rama, a single son to perpetuate the line ; and 
Suparna’s sister, Sumati, sixty thousand sons, high spirited 
and furnished with fame. And then, O son of Raghu, 
having gone round the saint and bowed down the head, the 
king went to his own capital, accompanied by his consorts. 
And after a length of time, the elder, Ke9ini, bore a son 
unto Sagara, known by the name of Asamanja. And Sumati, 
O foremost of men, brought forth a gourd. And when it 



• Garora. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BlLAKlNDAM . 



95 



burst open, out came from it sixty thousand sons. And the 
nurses fostered them by keeping them in jars filled with 
clarified butter. And after a great length of time, they 
attained to youth. And after a long lapse of time, Sagara' s 
sixty thousand sons attained to youth and beauty: And O 

foremost of men,* the eldest son of Sagara, taking those 
children, would, O descendant of Raghu, often cast them 
into the Sarayu, and in mirth behold them sinking in the 
waters. Being thus evil-disposed, and injuring honest 
folks, and engaged in doing wrong unto the citizens, he was 
banished by his father from the city. And Asamanja had a 
son possessed of prowess, named An£um&n. And he was 
beloved of all men and fair-spoken towards every one. 

And, O foremost of men, it came to pass that after a 
long time had gone by, that lord of earth Sagara made up 
his mind, saying, — ‘I will sacrifice. 1 . And having determined 
upon it, that one versed in the Vedas set about it,in company 
with his priests.” 



SECTION XXXIx. 



\\^ HEN Vi^wSmitra had ended, hearing his words, R&ma 
exceedingly pleased, spoke unto that ascetic resembling 
flaming fire, saying, — “I am anxious to hear in detail, good 
betide thee, how, O BrShmana, my ancestor arranged for the 
sacrifice.” Hearing those words of his, VigwSmitra, smiling, 
eagerly spoke unto Kikutstha, saying, — “Do thou, O R&ma, 
hearken unto the story of the high-souled Sagara's sacrifice. 
Sankara's father-in-law is the far-famed Himavat. And 
approaching each other, the Himavat and the Vindhya behold 
each other. And on the region lying between them took 

The text has Narasresthas , put for Asamanja. Evidently this is an error. 
I make it a vocative.—' T. 



Digitized by 



Google 





9 6 



rXmAyaNa. 



place, O foremost of men, that sacrifice of Sagara’s. And 
that country, O best of men, is excellent as a sacrificial 
ground. And, O Kakutstha, equipped with a powerful bow, 
that mighty car-warrior, living under Sagara’s sway, Ain^umat, 

0 child, followed the horse, for the purpose of protecting it. 
And it came to pass that with the intention of disturbing the 
sacrifice of that monarch, on a certain day Vasava, assuming 
the form of a R&kshasi, stole away the sacrificial horse * 
And, O Kakutstha, on the horse of that high-souled one 
being stolen, the priests said unto the king engaged in the 
ceremony, — 'On this auspicious day, hath the sacrificial 
horse been stolen by. violence. Do thou, O Kakutstha, slay 
him that steals the horse, — and bring it back. Otherwise 
the sacrifice will be defective, bringing us misfortune. There- 
fore, do thou, O king, act so, that the sacrifice may not be 
marred with defects.* Hearing the words of the priests, the 
king addressed his sixty thousand sons in the midst of his 
court, saying, — 'Being, as this great sacrifice is, presided 
over by eminently pious Brahmanas sanctified by mantras , 

1 do not, ye foremost of men, ye sons, see how Rakshasas 
may find entrance into it. Therefore, repair ye, and seek 
for the horse, ye sons. Good betide you ! Do ye search the 
entire earth engarlanded with oceans ; and do ye search 
Yoyana after Yoyana f ye sons. And do ye delve the earth 
till ye light upon the horse, by my command following the 
track of that stealer of the horse. I have been initiated into 
this sacrifice with my grand-sons and priests.* And there- 
at the mighty princes, enjoined by their father, breathing 
high spirits, began to range the earth, O Rama. Then they 
each fell to delving the bowels of the earth for the space of 
a Yoyana in length and breadth, with their hands resembling 
thunder-bolts in feel, and with darts like unto thunder-bolts, 
and with gigantic ploughshares. And being thus riven, the 
earth, O descendant of Raghu, began to send forth loud cries. 

• The Bengali edition reads this sloka differently. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BALAKANDAM. 



97 



0 RSghava, O thou hard to repress, there arose an uproar 
from serpents, and Asuras, and RSkshasas, and other crea- 
tures, that were being slaughtered. And, O descendant of 
Raghu. they excavated the earth, O R&ma, for sixty thousand 
Yoyanas , — yea, as if they had intended to reach the lowest 
depths underground. Thus, O foremost of kings, those sons 
of the monarch dug all around Jamvudwipa, filled with 
mountains. Thereat, the gods together with the Gandharbas, 
and Asuras, and Pannagas, in trepidation appeared before the 
Grand-sire. And propitiating that high-souled one, they 
with melancholy countenances and in exceeding agitation, 
spoke these words unto the Grand-sire, — ‘O adorable one, the 
entire earth is being excavated by the sons of Sagara ; and 
many are the high souled ones as well as the aquatic animals 
that are being slain in consequence. — This one is the disturber 
of our sacrifice, and by him hath the sacrificial horse been 
stolen, — saying this, Sagara* s sons are committing havoc upon 
all creatures.” 



SECTION XL. 



Hearing the speech of the celestials, that possessor 
of the six attributes, the Grand-sire, spoke unto them exceed- 
ingly frightened and deprived of their senses on beholding 
the prowess of Sagara*s sons like unto the Destroyer 
himself, — ‘This entire Earth belongeth unto the intelligent 
V&sudeva, she being his consort. And that adorable one is 
indeed her lord. And assuming the form of Kapila, he un- 
ceasingly sustaineth the Earth. And the sons of king Sagara 
will be consumed by the fire of his wrath. The pre-ordained 
excavation of the Earth, as well as the destruction of 
Sagara’s sons, had been foreseen by the far-sighted.* 
Hearing the words of the Grand-sire, those repressors of 

*3 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




,8 



RlMlyANA. 



their foes, the three and thirty* celestials, being exceedingly 
rejoiced, went back to their respective quarters. And as the 
sons of Sagara were riving the Earth, there arose a mighty 
noise, like unto the bursting of thunder. Then, having riven 
the entire Earth and ranged it all around, the sons of Sagara 
together (returned to their father) and spake unto him, saying 
—‘By us hath the Earth been extensively surveyed, and have 
powerful deities and D&navas, R&kshasas, Pi^chas, Urn gas 
and Pannagas been slain ; and yet do we find neither the 
horse nor the stealer thereof. What are we to do now ? Good 
betide thee, do thou consider it well.* Hearing those words 
of his sons, that foremost of kings, getting into a wrath, said, 
O descendant of Raghu, — ‘Do ye yet again, good betide ye, 
delve the earth, and having got at the stealer ot the horse, 
cease/ Receiving this mandate of their sire, the sixty- 
thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara rushed towards the 
depths of the earth. And as they were engaged in excavat- 
ing, they beheld the elephant of the quarter resembling a 
hill, named Virup&ksha, holding the earth. And, O son of 
Raghu, that mighty elephant, VirupSksha, held on his 
head the entire earth with its mountains and forests. 
And, O K&kutstha, when on sacred days the mighty elephant, 
from fatigue, shaketh his head, then takes place the earth- 
quake. Thereupon, O Rama, going round that mighty 
elephant, and honoring him duly, they went on piercing the 
underearth. And having pierced the East, they pierced 
the South, — and in the Southern quarter also they beheld a 
mighty elephant — the high-souled MahSpadma, resembling 
a huge hill, holding the earth on his head. And thereat they 
marvelled greatly. And having gone round him, the sixty- 
thousand sons of the high-souled Sagara began to penetrate 
into the Western region. And in the Western quarter also 
those highly powerful ones beheld the elephant of that 
quarter named Saumanasa, resembling a mighty mountain. 

* The eight Vasus, eleven Rudras , twelve Adityas and two Acwins. — T 



Digitized by 



Google 




BlLiKlNDAM, 



9 » 

And having gone round him, and asked him as to his welfare, 
they delving on, arrived at the Northern region. And 
on the North likewise, O foremost of the Raghus, they beheld 
Bhadra, white as snow, holding this earth on his goodly 
person. And having felt as well as gone round him, those 
sixty thousand sons of Sagara went on penetrating the 
depths of the earth. Then repairing to the famous North- 
eastern region, Sagara’s sons becoming enraged, began to 
dig the earth. And there those high-souled, exceedingly 
powerful and vehement ones beheld the eternal Vasudeva 
in the guise of Kapila. And there also, experiencing 
exceeding delight, O descendant of Raghu, they *found his 
horse, browsing hard by. And knowing him to be the des- 
troyer of the sacrifice, they bearing spades, and ploughs, 
and innumerable trees and crags, with eyes reddened with 
ire, furiously rushed against him, exclaiming, — ‘Stay ! Stay ! 
And thou it is that hast stolen our sacrificial horse. O thou 
of wicked understanding, know that thou hast fallen into the 
hands of the sons of Sagara. 9 Hearing this speech of 
theirs, Kapila, O descendant of Raghu, overwhelmed with 
rage uttered a tremendous roar. And then, O Kakutstha, 
the sons of Sagara were reduced to ashes by the high-souled 
and incomparable Kapila. 11 



SECTION X L I . 

— > q ■■■ : — 

Seeing the delay on the part of his sons, King Sagara, 
0 son of Raghu, addressed his grandson, flaming in his 
native energy, saying, — ‘Thou art heroic and accomplished 
and like unto thy uncles. Do thou enquire into the circum- 
stances that have befallen thy uncles, as also about the way 
by which the horse hath escaped. And as there are stong 
and mighty creatures inhabiting the Earth’s interior, with 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




10O 



RlJUlrANA. 



the view of resisting them, do thou take thy bow along with 
thy scimitar. And honoring those that deserve to be honored 
and slaying such as disturb thee, do thou, having attained 
thy end, come back, becoming the instrument for the com- 
pletion of my sacrifice. , Thus duly enjoined by the 
high-souled Sagara,An£umat endowed with fleet vigor, taking 
his bow as well as his scimitar, set out. And commanded by the 
monarch, O best of men, he found the underground way that 
had been carved out by those high-souled ones. And he 
found an exceedingly powerful elephant belonging to the 
cardinal point, worshipped by deities, and D&navas, and 
R&kshasas, and goblins, and birds, and Uragas. And having 
gone round him, and asked him as to his welfare, he enquired 
after his uncles and the stealer of the horse. Hearing this, 
the mighty-minded elephant of that quarter answered, — ‘O 
son of Asamanja, having attained thy object, thou wilt 
speedily return with the horse/ And hearing those words of 
his, Animat by turns duly asked the same question of all the 
elephants belonging to the cardinal points. And being honored 
by those guardians of the cardinal points, knowing words 
as well as their application in regard to time, place, and 
person, he was asked by them, saying, — *Do thou come 
with the horse P Hearing those words of theirs, that one 
of fleet vigor repaired unto the spot where the sons 
of Sagara, his uncles, had been reduced to a heap of ashes. 
And (arriving there), Asamanja’s son, smitten with grief, 
and being exceedingly afflicted at their destruction, bewailed 
in heaviness of heart. And exercised by grief and sorrow, 
that foremost of men espied there the sacrificial horse straying 
near. And desirous of offering oblations of water unto those 
princes, that highly powerful one in need of water, did not find 
any watery expanse in the neighbourhood. And it came to 
pass, O R&ma, that surveying wide, he descried the maternal 
uncle unto the princes, Suparna, the lord of birds, resembling 
the Wind. And thereupon Vinat&’s son possessed of 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakAndam. 



IOI 



mighty strength spoke unto him, saying, — *Do not lament, 
O foremost of men. The destruction of these was for the 
welfare of all. These highly powerful ones had been con- 
sumed by the peerless Kapila,— therefore, thou ought not to 
offer water unto them in consonance with social usuage. 
GangS, O foremost of men, is the elder daughter of 
Himavat. In her (streams) do thou perform the watery rites 
of thy uncles, O mighty-armed one : let that purifier of the 
worlds lave these, reduced to a heap of ashes. And on these 
ashes being watered by GangS, dear unto all, the sixty 
thousand sons of Sagara will repair unto the celestial regions. 
Do thou, O highly pious one, go back, taking this horse, O 
foremost of men ; and do thou complete the sacrifice of thy 
grand-father, O hero/ Hearing Suparna’s speech, the ex- 
ceedingly powerful Animat of mighty asceticism speedily 
taking the horse, retraced his steps. Then coming to the 
king who had been initiated into the ceremony, he, O 
descendant of Raghu, faithfully communicated unto him 
the words of Suparna, Hearing this sorrowful intelligence, 
the king duly finished the sacrifice agreeably to the scriptures. 
And having seen the completion of the sacrifice, that 
lord of earth entered his capital ; but the king could not see 
how to bring GangS. on earth. And without being able to 
ascertain it, the mighty monarch after a long course of 
time, and having reigned for thirty thousand years, ascended 
heaven.” 



SECTION x l 1 1 . 



HEN Sagara had bowed unto the influence of Time, 
the subjects selected the righteous An^umat for their king. 
And, O descendant of Raghu, Animat proved a great ruler. 
And his sOn, the celebrated Dilipa, was also a great king. And, 
O Raghu’ s son, consigning unto Dilipa his kingdom, Angumat 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




102 



XXMXYANA. 



entered upon rigid austerities on the romantic summit of the 
Himavat. And having for the space of thirty-two hundreds of 
thousands years carried on austeries in the woods, that highly 
famous one, crowned with the wealth of aceticism, attained 
the celestial regions. And the exceedingly powerful Dilipa, 
hearing of the destruction of his grand-fathers, was stricken 
with grief ; yet he could not ascertain his course about it. 
And he constantly thought as to how GangS. could be 
brought down, how to perform their watery rites, and how to 
deliver them. And as that pious one furnished with self- 
knowledge was always meditating upon this, an eminently 
virtuous son was born unto him named Bhagiratha. And per- 
forming numerous sacrifices, the mighty king Dilipa reigned 
for thirty thousand years. And without having arrived at any 
definite decision in regard to their deliverance, the king, O 
puissant one, being attacked with an ailment, breathed his 
last. And having sprinkled his son Bhagiratha in the way 
of installing him in the kingdom, that prime of men, the 
king, by virtue of his own acts, repaired to the region of 
Indra- And, O descendant of Raghu, that royal saint Bhagi- 
ratha was possessed of righteousness, And being without 
issue, and desiring to obtain it, the mighty monarch consign- 
ed his kingdom and his subjects to the care of his counsellors, 
and engaged in bringing down GangH. And, O Raghu’s 
descendant, restraining his senses, and eating once a month, 
and surrounding himself with five fires, and with arms up- 
raised, he for a long lapse of time performed austerities at 
Gokarna. And as he was performing his terrible austerities, 
a thousand years rolled away. And thereat that possessor of 
the six attributes and lord of all creatures, BrahmS, was wel- 
pleased with that high-souled monarch. And presenting 
himself together with the celestials, the Grand-sire thus spoke 
unto the high-souled Bhagiratha engaged in austerities, — ’O 
Bhagiratha, O mighty monarch, pleased am I with thee, O 
lord of men, on account of thy ardent austerities ; do thou. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlLNDAM . 



JOJ 



O thou of excellent vows, ask for the boon thou wouldst 
have.* Thereupon that great car-warrior, the highly power- 
ful and mighty-armed Bhagiratha, with clasped hands, said 
unto the Grand-sire of all creatures, — ‘If, adorable one, 
thou art pleased with me, if thou wouldst grant me the fruit 
of my asceticism, may Sagara’s sons receive water at my 
hands ; and on the ashes of those high-souled ones being 
laved by the waters of GangS, may my great-grand-fathers 
without fail repair unto heaven j And, O divine one, I 
beseech thee, may our line never languish for want of off- 
spring. May, O God, this prime boon light upon Ikslnv&ku's 
race !' When the king had said this, the Grand-sire address- 
ed him these sweet and auspicious words composed of 
melting letters, — ‘O mighty car-warrior Bhagiratha, high is 
this thy aim. Be it so, good betide thee, thou enhancer of 
the Ikshwaku line. This Haimavati Gang5, Himavat's elder 
daughter, even her to hold, O king, do thou employ Hara ; for 
Gang&’s fall, O king, Earth will not be able to sustain. And 
to hold her, O king, find I none save the weilder of the 
Trident.” Having thus addressed the monarch, and greeted 
GangS, the creator of the worlds repaired to heaven with the 
celestials. 



SECTION XLtll. 



W HEN that god of gods had gone away, Bhagiratha, 

0 R5ma, pressing the earth with his thumb, spent a year in 
adoring Siva. And when the year was complete, Um&'s lord, 
Pa 9 upati, worshipped of all the worlds, spake unto the king, 
saying, — 'O foremost of men, I am well-pleased with thee : 

1 will do what will be for thy welfare. 1 will hold the 
Mountain's daughter on my head/ Then, O RSma, that one 
bowed unto by all creatures, the elder daughter of Himavat, 
assuming an exceedingly mighty shape, with irresistible 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




104 



film A VAN A. 



impetus precipitated herself from the welkin upon Siva’s 
gracious head. And that divine one, GangS, exceedingly 
difficult to sustain, thought, — ‘I will enter the nether regions/ 
carrying off Sankara by my streams.’ Knowing her 
proud intention, the adorable Hara waxed wroth ; and the 
three-eyed deity set his heart upon enveloping her. And, 
O R&ma, as that sacred one plunged upon Rudra’s holy 
head of tangled locks, resembling Himavat, she could by no 
means reach the earth, despite all her endeavours ; nor did 
she obtain egress from under the matted locks. And she 
wandered there for many a year. And finding GangS. in 
this plight, Bhagiratha became again engaged in high 
austerities. And thereupon Siva, O descendant of Raghu, 
was exceedingly gratified ; and cast GangS. off in the direction 
of the Vindu lake. And as she was let off, seven streams 
branched out from her. And the three streams of the excel- 
lent Gang5 of auspicious waters went in an easterly direct- 
ion ; while the Suchakshu, the Sits, and that mighty river 
the Sindhu flowed on the auspicious west. And the seventh 
followed Bhagiratha’s car. And that royal saint, the 
exceedingly puissant Bhagiratha, mounted on a superb car, 
went before ; and Ganga followed him. And she des- 
cended from the welkin upon Sankara’s head, thence 
alighting upon the earth ; and there her waters flowed 
with thundering sounds. And earth looked beautiful with 
swarms of fallen and falling fishes, and tortoises, and por- 
poises. And then celestials and saints and Gandharbas, and 
Yakshas and Siddhas mounted on excellent elephants and 
horses and cars resembling cities, looked on Gang& des- 
cending upon the earth. And the celestials stationed on cars 
were struck with surprise ; and all creatures marvelled at 
the excellent descent of Gang3. And eager to witness 
the spectacle, celestial hosts of immeasurable energy came 
there. And in consequence of the celestials coming thither, 
and the effulgence of their ornaments, the firmament free 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



BlLAKlNDAM. 



105 

from clouds, shone as if with an hundred suns. And the 
sky was graced with fast-fleeting porposies and serpents 
and fishes resembling playing lightning ; and the welkin 
scattered with pale foam-flakes by thousands, appeared as if 
it was scattered with autumnal clouds swarming with cranes. 
And the river proceeded sometimes rapidly, and sometimes 
awry, and sometimes in volumes, and sometimes sloping, 
and sometimes ascending, and sometimes languidly ; and 
sometimes water clashed with water 5 and sometimes as- 
cending an upland, it descended into a dell. And the pellu- 
cid and pure water first descending upon Sankara’s head, 
and thence on to the earth, appeared exceedingly beautiful. 
And there the saints and the Gandharbas, as well as the 
inhabitants' of the earth/ touched the sacred water 
flowing from Bhaba’s body. And those that had fallen 
from the sky unto the earth in consequence of some curse or 
other, having bathed there, and thereby having their sins 
washed and removed by that sanctifying water, again as- 
cended the sky and entered their respective regions. And 
through the agency of that shining water, all beings, feeling 
delight, rejoiced, and having bathed in Ganga, became 
cleansed from sin. And stationed on an excellent car that 
mighty king, the royal saint Bhagiratha, went first, and 
GangS went at his back. And the gods, and the saints, and 
the Daityas, and the Danavas, and the Rakshasas, and the 
foremost of Gandharbas and Yakshas, and the Kinnaras,. and 
the mighty Uragas, and the Serpents, and the Apsaras, O 
Rama and the acquatic animals in a body following Bhagi- 
ratha's car, with glad hearts went in the wake of Ganga. And 
withersoever king Bhagiratha went, the famous Ganga, fore- 
most of streams, capable of destroying all sins, went. And 
Ganga flooded the sacrificial ground of the high-souled Jahnu, of 
wonderful deeds, as he was performing a sacrifice. Thereat, 
O RSghava, reading her insolence, Jahnu, waxing wroth, 
drank up all her wonderful waters. Thereupon, the deities, 
14 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




io6 rImAYANA. 

and the Gandharbas, and the saints, struck with amazement, 
fell to worshipping that foremost of men, the high-souled Jahnu 
and brought Ganga into the daughtership of that high souled 
one. And that highly energetic lord, being propitiated, let 
Ganga off through his ears. Therefore it is that Ganga goes 
by the name of Jahnu’s daughter Jahnavi. Then Ganga again 
began to follow Bhagiratha's car. And having reached the 
ocean, that foremost of streams, with the object of accompli- 
shing his work, entered into the subterranean regions. And 
having carefully brought Ganga, that royal saint, Bhagiratha, 
having his senses bewildered beheld his grand-fathers reduc- 
ed to ashes. And the excellent waters of Ganga overflowed 
that heap of ashes ; and thereupon, O best of the Raghus, 
they, their sins purged, attained heaven.” 



SECTION XLIV. 



J_HEN having arrived at the Ocean, the king wending 
in Ganga's wake, entered underneath the Earth, at that spot 
where those (sons of Sagara) had been reduced to ashes. 
And, O Rama, on the ashes being washed by the w ? aters of 
Ganga, Brahma, the lord of all creatures thus spoke unto the 
monarch, — 'O most puissant of men, the sixty three thousand 
sons of the high-souled Sagara have been delivered — and they 
have ascended heaven like unto celestials themselves. And, O 
lord of earth, as long as the waters of the ocean shall en- 
dure in the world, Sagara's sons shall reside in heaven 
like unto celestials. And this Ganga shall become thy eld- 
est daughter ; and she shall attain celebrity among all, being 
called after thy name. And Ganga is called both Tripathaga 
and Bhagirathi. And she is known as Tripathaga, in conse- 
quence of her proceeding in three directions. Do thou now, 
O lord of men, here offer oblations of water unto thy grand 
sires, —and thereby, O king, make good thy promise. And, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM . 



107 



O king, that foremost of righteous ones, thy ancestor of ex- 
ceeding renown, had failed to atain his desire. And, O 
child, Animat likewise unparalleled in the worlds in energy 
had failed in realising his cherished promise of bringing 
down GangS. And then again that royal saint, crowned 
with qualities, of austerities like unto mine, ever abiding 
by his Kshatriya duties, even Dilipa's self— thy exceedingly 
puissant sire — O eminently righteous one — had failed in 
bringing down GangS according to his cherished resolve, O 
sinless one. And now, O foremost of men, that promise hav- 
ing been fulfilled by thee, thou shalt attain signal glory in the 
world by the common consent of all. And, O vanquisher of 
thy foes, having brought about Ganges descension, thou 
shalt from this act of thine also attain the regions of Brahma. 
Do thou, O best of men, lave thyself in these waters incapable 
of being rendered worthless. O prime of men, — and there- 
by become purified, and attain sanctity. And do thou 
perform the watery rites of thy grand-sires. May luck be 
thine, I shall now repair to my own regions : do thou depart, 
O king. 1 Having said this, the illustrious lord of the celestials — 
the Grand-sire of all creatures — went unto the celestial regions. 
And the royal saint king Bhagiratha also of high fame having 
performed his ablutions and purified himself, and duly and in 
proper order offered oblations of water unto the sons of Sagara, 
entered his capital. And attaining exceeding prosperity, that 
foremost of men ruled his kingdom ; and, O descendant of 
Raghu, having him as their sovereign, the people rejoiced 
greatly ; and with their griefs removed, and prosperity secur- 
ed, they lived in peace of mind. Thus, O R5ma, have I 
detailed unto fhee the history of Ganga. Auspiciousness 
mayst thou obtain ! Good betide thee, the evening draweth 
nigh. He that reciteth this story conferring prosperity, fame, 
long life, and heaven unto Vipras, Kshatriyas, and others, attain 
eth the good graces of his ancestors and the celestials 5 and, 
O Kakutstha, he that listeneth to the sacred history of Gang&’s 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




io8 



rAmAyana. 



descent, conferring length of days, attaineth all his desires, 
and all his sins are destroyed, and his life and fame increase." 



SECTION X L V. 



Hearing the words of Vi^wamitra, Raghava, together 
with Lakshmana, was struck with amazement, — and spoke 
unto Visw&mitra, saying, — “O Brahmana, wonderful is the 
story that thou hast recited unto us, viz ; that of Ganga’s 
sacred descension and the replenishing of the Ocean. And, 
O afflicter of foes, as we had been reflecting upon all this at 
length, the night hath passed away as if it were a moment. 
And the live-long night hath passed away as I in company 
with Sumitra’s son, was pondering over Vi^wamitra's aus- 
picious speech." Then in the morning which happened to be 
bright, that subduer of his foes, Raghu's descendant, ad- 
dressed the ascetic Vi^wamitra, who had finished his de- 
votion, — “The auspicious night is past, — and we shall (again) 
listen to thy wonderful narrations. Let us now cross over 
this sacred stream — foremost of rivers — wending in three 
ways. And learning that thou hast arrived at this place, 
the pious ascetics have speedily come hither, and have 
also brought this barque with a spacious carpet." Hearing 
those words of the high-souled Raghava, Kau9*ika crossed 
over the crowds of ascetics ; and on reaching the north bank, 
he paid homage unto the saints. And when they had land- 
ed on the banks of the Ganga, they beheld a city named 
V^ala. And thereupon speedily that foremost of ascetics 
in company with Raghava, went towards V^ala, — beautiful 
and elegant like unto the celestial regions. Then the highly 
wise R£ma, with folded hands, asked that mighty ascetic 
Vi 9 wamitra concerning the excellent city of Vi9ala,-“0 mighty 
ascetic, what royal line resideth in yonder large city ? 1 



Digitized by 



Google 




bAlakAndam. 



109 



desire to hear this, good betide thee ; and great is my curi- 
osity.” Hearing those words of Rama, that foremost of 
ascetics began to relate the history of Vi^aia, saying, — “Do 
thou listen, O Rima, to what I had heard from Sakra rela- 
ting this history ; and, O descendant of Raghu, do thou 
listen to all that befell in this city. Formerly in the Krita 
age, O Rama, Diti’s highly powerful sons, as well as those 
of Aditi, possessed of prowess, and virtuous and pious— 
high-souled ones both — O foremost of men, fell to reflect- 
ing, — ‘How can we become exempt from decrepitude and 
disease, and immortal/ And as they reflected, it struck 
them, — ‘By churning the ocean of milk, we must obtain am- 
brosia/ Then deciding upon churning (the ocean), those 
ones of immeasurable energy making Vasuki the cord, and 
the Mandara (hill), the stick, began to churn the deep. And 
after a thousand years had gone by, the hoods (of the ser- 
pent) serving as the churning cord, began to vomit virulent 
venom and to bite at the crags, with their fangs. And 
thereat there came out powerful poison like unto fire ; and 
in consequence the entire universe with celestials, and Asuras, 
and men, began to burn. And thereupon, intending to seek 
refuge, they appeared before that mighty god, Sankara, or 
Pa^upati, or Rudra, — hymning him, — ‘Save us/ ‘Save us/ 
When that master, the lord of the celestials, was being thus 
addressed by the deities, there appeared before them Hari bear- 
ing the conch and the discus. And smiling Hari said unto 
the trident-bearing Rudra, — ‘O chief of the celestials, since 
thou art the foremost of the gods, this that hath come out of 
the ocean churned by the celestials, us thine. Remaining here, 
O lord, do thou receive the first offering in the form of this 
poison/ Having said this, that best of celestials vanished 
there. Witnessing the dismay of the celestials, and hearing 
also the words of Sarngin, Siva took in that dreadful poison 
as if it were nectar $ and then leaving the deities, the wor- 
shipful Hara went away. And then, O descendant of Raghu, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




no 



RlMlYANA. 



as the celestials resumed the churning, that foremost of hills 
serving as the cord, entered the subterranean regions. 
Thereupon the gods and the Gandharbas fell to extolling the 
slayer of Madhu, saying, — *Thou art the way of all beings, 
of the celestials in especial. Do thou, O mighty-armed one, 
protect us, and recover the mountain.’ Having heard this, 
Hrishikesa, or Hari, assuming the form of a tortoise, stood in 
the sea, supporting the hill on his back ; and that Soul of all, 
JKe?ava best of male beings, taking hold of the top of the 
hill by his hand, began to churn the deep, stationed in the 
midst of the celestials. And after a thousand years had roll- 
ed on, arose a male being impregnated with the Ayurveda,* 
of exceedingly righteous soul, called Dhanwantari, bearing 
in his hands a stick, and a Kamandalu. And there arose 
also, from the cream of the churning waters, those magnificent 
dames the shining ApsarSs. And, O foremost of men, as they 
had emerged from water, they are called Apsards . t And 
there sprang sixty Kotis of shining Apasaras. And, O Kakuts- 
tha, the female attendants of those are numberless. And neither 
the deities nor the Dlnavas would accept them, — and in con- 
sequence of this non-acceptance, they are known as women 
belonging to all. And then, O Raghu's descendant, arose the 
eminently pious daughter of Varuna, VSLruni, who fell to look- 
ing for acceptance. And Diti’s sons, O Rama, did not accept 
the daughter of Varuna, — and Aditi’s sons, O hero, accepted 
that one of blameless limbs. And hence Diti’s sons go by 
the name of Asuras ; and Aditi’s by that of Suras. And the 
celestials became exceeding glad, on having accepted Varuni. 
And, O foremost of men, next arose Uchhai^ravS — best of 
horses, and also Kaustubha ; and next, the excellent ambrosia. 
And,0 R5ma, tremendous was the carnage for the porsession 
thereof (ambrosia) ; and Aditi’s and Diti’s sons fought 
together. And the Asuras assembled together with the 

• Science of Medicine. — T. 

t Ap means water. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





bAlakXnda m. 



Ill 



R&kshasas ; and, O hero, mighty was the battle that was 
fought, striking terror into the three worlds. And when a 
great havoc had been committed, the highly powerful Vishnu, 
assuming a captivating form speedily stole away the ambrosia. 
And those that came forward before that best of male beings, 
Vishnu, knowing no deterioration, were crushed in conflict 
by Vishnu in a different form. And in that exceedingly 
dreadful battle between the sons of Diti and Aditi, those 
heroic ones,z/i!ar., Aditi's heroic sons slaughtered those of Diti. 
And having slaughtered the sons of Diti and regained his 
kingdom, Purandara, happily began to rule the worlds, 
containing saints and ChSranas.” 



SECTION X L V I . 

gie» 

“ A 

jOLND on those sons of her being slain, Diti afflicted with 
great grief, thus addressed her husband, Mancha* s son, Ka9ya- 
pa, — ‘O adorable one, thy high-souled sons have slain mine. 
I now wish for a son, who, obtained through long austerities, 
will be able to slay Sakra. And I will engage in austerities : 
it behoves thee to grant me such an embryo, — such a 
slayer of Sakra it behoves thee to promise me,' Hearing 
those words of hers, Maricha’s son, Ka9yapa of exceeding 
energy answered the deeply aggrieved Diti, saying, — ‘Be 
it so.’ Good betide thee, do thou become pure, O ascetic. If 
thou remain pure, when a full thousand years shall be com- 
plete, thou wilt give birth unto a son who will slay Sakra 
in battle. And through me, thou wilt give birth to a son 
that will destroy the three worlds. 1 Having said this, that 
highly energetic one rubbed her person with his palm. And 
having rubbed her, he said, — ‘Luck V and then went away 
to carry on austerities. And when he had gone, Diti, 
O foremost of men, becoming exceedingly delighted, went 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




112 



RlMlFANA. 



unto Ku9aplava* and began to practise rigid mortifications. 
And, O foremost of men, as she was practising austerities, 
the thousand-eyed deity most dutifully ministered unto her. 
And the thousand-eyed one provided for her fire, and Kusa , 
and faggots, and water, and fruits, and roots, and other 
things that she wanted. And at all times, Sakra served Diti 
by rubbing her person, and removing her fatigue. And when 
ten years only were wanting to complete the thousand years, 
Diti, O descendant of Raghu, being exceedingly delighted, 
thus spoke unto the thousand-eyed one, — ‘O best of those 
endowed with prowess, of me engaged in austerities, ten 
yeas only remain (to complete the period.) And after that 
time, good betide thee, thou wilt behold thy brother. I will, 
O son, bind him unto thee in affection, whom I had besought 
for to compass thy destruction, — so that, the fever of thy 
heart removed, thou wilt with him enjoy the victory of the 
three worlds. On thy high-souled sire having been besought 
by me, he, O foremost of celestials, granted me the boon that 
after a thousand years, I shall obtain a son/ And it came 
to pass that having said this, the sun being in his meridian, 
the worshipful Diti with her feet placed at that part of the bed 
which should contain her head, was overpowered by sleep. 
And thereupon seeing her resting her feet at the place where 
she should place her head, — and consequently unclean, Sakra 
was exceedingly delighted, and smiled. And, O Rama, 
Purandara entered into her womb, and that highly self con- 
trolled one severed the embryo in seven parts. And the em- 
bryo being pierced by the thunder-bolt of an hundred knots, 
cried at the top of its voice, and thereat Diti awoke. ‘Do not 
cry, do not cry/ — exclaimed Sakra : and even while it was 
crying, the mighty-minded Vasava continued piercing it. 
‘Do not slay it ; do not slay it/ said Diti. Thereupon, in 
consideration of the honor of his mother, Sakra went out. 



* An asylum on the east, otherwise called Beshalaksha. — T* 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





bAla KANDA m . 



“3 



Then he with clasped palms accosted Diti, saying , — ‘ O wor- 
shipful one. thou didst sleep with thy feet placed where thy 
head should have lain, and hast therefore become impure. And 
finding this opportunity, I severed in seven pieces that would 
be slayer of mine in battle. Do thou, O worshipful one excuse 



SECTION XLVII. 

W HEN the embryo had been sundered in seven, 
Diti exceedingly aggrieved humbly spoke unto the irrepressi- 
ble thousand-eyed deity, saying, — 'By my fault it is that the 
embryo hath been sundered in seven. 0 chief of the celes- 
tials, herein thou art guilty of no transgression, O destroyer 
of Vala, And since calamity hath befallen the embryo, I 
wish to do thee a good turn. Let the seven parts become 
the guardians of the seven Maruts. And, O son, let my sons 
having noble forms, becoming famous as Marutas range the 
V&taskandha regions in heaven. And let one range Brahma’s 
regions, and another Indra's, and the highly illustrious third 
also range around, being known as Divya Vayu * And, O best 
of celestials, by thy command, let the four remaining sons of 
mine known by the name which thou hast mentioned, range 
about in appointed periods/ Hearing her words, that destroyer 
of Vala ; the thousand-eyed Purandara, with clasped palms 
said, — ‘All this that thou hast said must come to pass ; there 
is no doubt about it. Good betide thee, thy sons endowed 
with celestial forms, shall range about. And it hath been 
heard by us that having thus ascertained in that hermitage, 
the mother and the son, O Kama, went to heaven, their 
desire obtained. Even this, O Kakutstha, is the place where 

Etherial air. — T. 

15 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





114 



V RAmIYANA. 



formerly the mighty Indra sojourned, and where he attended 
upon Diti of accomplished ascetic success. And, O most 
powerful of men, IkshwSku had an exceedingly righteous 
son born unto him of Alamvush§, known by the name of 
Vi^&la. And here stood a palace, built by him, called Vi^AlA. 
And Villa’s son, O Rama, was the mighty Hemachandra. 
And after Hemachandra comes the celebrated Suchandra. 
And, O Rama, the son of Suchandra was DhumrSswa. And 
then was born Srinjaya, son unto DhumrSswa. And Srin- 
jaya’s son was the powerful Sahadeva. And Sahadeva’s son 
was the pre-eminently pious Kuga^wa. And Ku£££wa’s 
son was the puissant Somadatta. And now, O K&kutstha, 
Somadatta’s son the effulgent and invincible and renowned 
Sumati resideth in this city. And by the grace of 
Ikshw&ku, all the sovereigns of Vi^&lSi are long-lived, and high- 
souled, and puissant, and pious. And here will we happily 
spend a night ; and on the morning of the morrow thou wilt, 
O foremost of men, behold Janaka.’ And having heard that 
the illustrious Vi^wamitra had come, that best of kings, the 
effulgent Sumati, appeared before him. And having paid 
Vifw&mitra high homage together with his priests and friends, 
and with clasped hands enquired after the former’s welfare, 
he addressed Vigw&mitra, saying, — ‘‘Blessed are we, and 
obliged are we, whose domains, O ascetic, have been graced 
with thy presence. Surely none is more blessed than I am/* 



SECTION XLVIll. 



Having met together, they enquired after each other’s 
welfare. And then Sumati spoke unto the mighty ascetic, 
saying, — “Good betide thee, boasting of the prowess of celes- 
tials of elephantine or leonine gait, heroic resembling tigers or 
bulls, possessed of expansive eyes like lotus-petals, bearing 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



IT 5 



scimitars and bows and quivers, like unto the A^wins in 
grace, endowed with youth, like unto celestials fancy-led, 
descended from etherial regions to the earth beneath, whose 
sons, O ascetic, are these boys, and what for have they come 
hither, and why also is it that they journey on foot ? And 
adoring all directions, like unto the Sun or the Moon 
adorning the firmament, and resembling each other in per- 
sonal proportions, and expressions, and gestures, and equip- 
ped with excellent weapons, and war-like, how have these 
paragons cf men come into this impracticable way ? I wish 
to hear all this related truly.” Having heard his words, 
Vicw&mitra faithfully related all about it. Hearing V^wft- 
mitra’s words, the king was extremely surprised $ and 
having those sons of Da^aratha as his all-worthy guests, 
received with becoming respect those highly powerful ones 
deserving of hospitality. And meeting with such splendid 
reception from Sumati, those descendants of Raghu spent 
there a night, and the next day set out for MithilS. And 
beholding Janaka's beauteous city, the ascetics exclaiming, 
— ‘Excellent, excellent* fell to admiring MithilS. And in 
a grove at Mithili, RSghava saw an ancient, lonely, and 
romantic asylum, and asked that foremost of ascetics, say- 
ing, — “What is this that looketh like an asylum, though 
without any ascetics ? I wish to hear, O worshipful one, to 
whom this asylum belonged in time past.” Hearing this 
speech addressed by Raghu's descendant, that one versed 
in speech, the highly energetic and mighty saint, V^w&mitra, 
answered, — “Ah ! Do thou listen. I will tell thee through 
the wrath of what high-souled one this hermitage came to 
be cursed. O foremost of men, this excellent asylum honored 
by the celestials themselves, formerly ^belonged to the high- 
souled Gautama. And here, O illustrious prince, in days 
of yore Gautama in company with AhalyS carried on aus- 
terities for a long series of years. And perceiving occasion, 
Sachas lord, the thousand-eyed deity, assuming the form 



Digitized by 



Google 




1 1 6 



RlMlFANA. 



of that ascetic thus addressed Ahaly &, — ( 0 exceedingly 
beautiful one, those bent upon sport, do not stay for the 
menstrual season. And, O graceful one, I desire to enjoy 
thy company (on the instant). Thereupon, out of curiosity, 
that one of perverse understanding consented to the propo- 
sals of the chief of the celestials. Then, having attained her 
object, she spoke unto that foremost of the celestials, say- 
ing, — ‘O best of the immortals, I have obtained my desire, 
— do thou speedily go from his place, O lord. Do thou, 
O lord of the celestials, from a sense of repectibility 
preserve thyself and me also/ Indra too smiling, said unto Aha- 
lySL, — ‘O thou of shapely hips, pleased am I. Now I repair 
unto my own place/ Having known her thus, Indra, O 
Rima, exceedingly apprehensive of Gautama, then hurriedly 
sallied out of the thatched cottage. Just at this time, Indra 
saw that mighty ascetic Gautama entering— that foremost 
of anchorets, incapable of being repressed by the deities 
and the Danavas, and equipped with ascetic energy, having 
bathed in the waters of holy spots, and flaming like fire, 
carrying faggots anil kusa grass. And seeing him, the coun- 
tenance of the lord of the celestials turned pale. And 
seeing the wicked thousand-eyed deity in the guise of an 
ascetic, the well-behaved anchoret fired with rage said, — 
‘And since, O thou of wicked understanding assuming my 
form, thou hast done this foul deed, thou shalt lose thy 
scrotum/ And soon as the high-souled Gautama had said 
this in ire, the scrotum of the thousand-eyed one dropped 
to the earth. And having seen Sakra in this plight, he 
cursed his wife also, — ‘For a thousand years thou sbalt 
live here feeding upon air, without food, tormented with 
repentance and thou shalt remain in this hermitage 
unseen of any. And when the irrepressible son of Da^aratha' 
R&ma, shall come to this deep wood, thou shalt be cleansed 
of thy sin. And, O wicked one, ministering unto him the 
rites of hospitality, with a mind free from ignorance and 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




covetousness, thou shalt in thy own form with joy regain 
my side.* Having said this to that wicked woman the highly 
energetic Gautama of rigid austerities, forsaking this her- 
mitage, began to carry on penances on the romantic summit 
of the Himavat, inhabited by Siddhas and Charanas.” 



SECTION xlix 



“ A 

ixND having been deprived of his scrotum, Sakra 
with eyes tremulous with fear, addressed the celestials with 
Agni at their head, as well as the Siddhas and the Gand- 
harbas and the Ch&ranas, saying, — ‘I have accomplished 
the work of the celestials by stirring the ire of the high- 
souled Gautama, and thereby disturbing his austerities. And 
in doing so, I have been deprived of my scrotum ; and Ahaly& 
also hath been put down. And I have deprived him of his 
ascetic energy by causing him to utter a mighty curse, — and, 
therefore, ye celestials, and saints, and ChSranas, ye should res- 
tore my scrotum unto me who have served the gods.’ Hear- 
ing Satakratu's* words, the deities along with the Maruts 
led by Agni, presented themselves before the divine Pitris.? 
And then Agni addressed the latter, saying, — ‘This ram is 
possessed of a scrotum ; while Sakra hath been deprived of 
his. Do ye taking the scrotum of the ram furnish Sakra with it. 
And although deprived of the scrotum, the ram will be able to 
grant consummate satisfaction unto ye. And on those that 
will offer such a ram for your entertainment, ye will bestow 
undying and profuse merit/ Hearing Agni’s speech, the 
assembled Pitris, rooting up the scrotum of the ram, joined 
it unto the person of the thousand-eyed deity. Tlience- 

• Lit. the performer of an hundred sacrifices, one of the appellations of 

Indra. 

t The ancestors. 



1 1 8 



KlMlYANA. 



forth, 0 Kakutstha, the divine Pitris together feast upon 
scrotumless rams, for their scrotum had been joined unto 
the person of Indra. And thenceforth, O RSghava, Indra 
also through the higk-souled Gautama’s ascetic energy, 
hath been bearing the scrotum of a ram. Therefore, O high- 
ly powerful one, do thou enter the hermitage of that 
pious one, and deliver the dignified and divinely fair AhalyJL' 
On hearing Vi^wSmitra’s words, R&ghava in company with 
Lakshmana, placing Vi^wSmitra in their front, entered the 
asylum ; and they beheld that magnificent dame flaming in 
ascetic energy ; and incapable of being gazed at too near 
even by the celestials and the Asuras ; as if created by 
the Deity to be the divinely charming Woman ; like 
a flame hid in smoke ; or the brightness of the full moon 
clouded and dimmed in mist ; or the solar splendour 
incapable of being beheld on account of clouds. And 
by virtue of Gautama’s word, she had been incapable of being 
seen by any in the three worlds, till the sight of R&ma. 
And now the curse having come to an end, she could be 
perceived by them. And the two descendants of Raghu 
then took hold of her feet ; but remembering Gautama’s 
words, she on her part took hold of theirs. And with a 
collected mind she gave them water for their feet as well 
as Arghya , and extended unto them the rites of hospitality. 
And the Kakutsthas accepted the homage thus rendered 
according to the ordinance. And blossoms began to shower 
copiously to the sounds of kettledrums ; and the Gandharbas 
and the Apsaras began to rejoice greatly. And exclaiming, 
‘Excellent, excellent,* the celestials honored AhalyS, as with a 
person purified by penance, she again came under Gautama’s 
governance. And the highly energetic Gautama also happy on 
his union with Ahalyi, honored Rama highly, and that one of 
mighty mortifications then became engaged in austerities. 
And having duly received signal honors from the great 
ascetic Gautama, Rama set out for MithilS. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlL.KKlNDAM. 



119 



SECTION L. 



Then proceeding north-east RSma in company with 
Sumitra’s son, placing Vi^wamitra at their head, appeared 
before the sacrificial ground. And Rama and Lakshmana 
said unto that puissant ascetic, — “Great is the pomp and 
splendour of the high-souled Janaka’s sacrifice. And, O pious 
one, many thousand of Brahmanas inhabiting various re- 
gions, and well-read in the Vedas ^have come to this sacrifice); 
and the abodes of ascetics are thronged with hundreds of 
cars. Do thou, O Brahmana, arrange for some place where 
we may put up.” Hearing R&ma’s words, the mighty ascetic 
Vi^wSmitra selected for their abode a well-watered spot free 
from bustle and tumult. And hearing of Vi^wamitra’s arriv- 
al, the best of monarchs without blame, placing the priests 
Satananda before him, as well as the high-souled family 
priests, speedily taking the arghya, at once went out in humble 
guise, and offered it unto Vi^wimitra according to the or- 
dinance. Having accepted that homage of the high-souled 
Janaka, the ascetic enquired after the king’s welfare, and the 
uninterrupted performance of his sacrifice. And the king 
together with his priests, having enquired of the ascetics as 
to their welfare, cheerfully embraced them all in a proper 
way. Then he with clasped hands, spoke unto that foremost 
of anchorets, saying, — “O worshipful one, do thou along 
with these eminent ascetics, take thy seat.” Hearing Jana- 
ta' s words, the mighty ascetic sat him down. And the king 
also, in company with his priests and counsellors sat down 
around in order of rank. And then the monarch looking 
into Vi^w&mitra’s face, said, — “To-day by the grace of the 
gods, hath my sacrifice been crowned with success — to-day 
have I reaped the fruit pf my sacrifice by beholding thy 
worshipful self. Blessed and obliged am I whose sacrificial 
ground, O Brahmana, hath been graced by thee along with 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




120 



RlMlyANA. 



these ascetics. Twelve days, 0 Brahmarshi, have been fixed 
for the period of initiation by the sages. On the expiry of 
that term, thou wilt, O Kau^ika, behold the celestials come 
unto the sacrifice for claiming their respective shares.” Hav- 
ing said this, the king with a cheerful countenance, with 
folded hands, again intently asked that foremost of ascetics,— 
“These youths, good betide thee, like unto celestials in 
prowess, of the gait of lions or elephants, heroic, and resem- 
bling tigers or bulls, of expansive eyes like unto lotus-petals, 
bearing scimitars, quivers and bows, graceful like unto the 
A^wins, endowed with youth, resembling immortals fancy. led 
from heaven unto the earth — whose sons, O ascetic, are they 
and what for have they come, and why again have they come 
afoot ? And bearing excellent arms, whose sons, O mighty 
anchoret, are these heroic ones, who grace this place even as 
the sun and the moon do the welkin, and resemble each other 
in bodily proportions, expression, and gestures ; wearing 
side-locks and of warlike mien ? This I would hear truly rela- 
ted.” Hearing this speech of the high-souled janaka, that 
ascetic of immeasurable soul related all about Da^aratha's 
sons, — their sojourn in Siddh^rama, and the slaughter there 
of the Rakshasas, their undaunted journey, the sight of Vi^la, 
the encounter with AhalyH and Gautama, R&ma’s curiosity 
about the mighty bow, and visit there for beholding the same. 
Having related all this unto the high-souled Janaka that one 
endowed with exceeding energy, the mighty ascetic Vifwi- 
mitra, paused. 



SECTION LI. 



Hearing the narration of the intelligent Vi^wSmitra, 
Gautama’s eldest son, the exceedingly energetic S<it&nanda 
of rigid austerities, highly effulgent by virtue of his asceti- 
cism, with his down standing on end wondered greatly at 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




the sight of Rama. And seeing the king’s sons seated at 
their ease, he said unto that foremost of ascetics, Vi^wamitra, 
— “O most powerful of anchorets, by thee was my illustri- 
ous mother, grown old in asceticism, shown unto the 
king’s son. Did my famous and exalted mother entertain 
with the produce of the woods Rama worthy of every 
one’s homage ? And, O highly energetic one, hath that old 
story relative to my mother having been wronged by that 
celestial, been communicated unto Rama ? And, O Kau^ka, 
good betide thee, hath my mother, in consequence of be- 
holding Rama, been united with my revered sire ? And, 
0 son of Ku^ika, hath the highly energetic Rama come 
hither, after having been rendered homage by my high- 
souled revered sire ? And, O Kucika’s son, was my revered 
sire of quiescent soul, saluted by Rama when he arrived 
there ?” Hearing those words of his, the mighty ascetic 
Vi^wSmitra, skilled in speech, replied unto Satananda, 
cognizant of words, saying,— “O best of ascetics, nothing 
necessary w T as omitted by me, — but everything hath been 
done. And the ascetic’s wife hath been united with him, 
even as Renuka with Bhrigu’s son.*” Hearing the speech 
of the intelligent Vi^wamitra, the exceedingly energetic 
Satananda said unto Rama, — “Art thou well come, O chief 
of men ? It is by our luck that, O descendant of Raghu 
thou hast come unto us, headed by the respected Ma- 
harshi Vicw&mitra. This highly energetic Vi^wSmitra, this 
Brahmarshi is of prowess measureless ; and deeds incon- 
ceivable, by virtue of his asceticism. Him thou knowest as 

r the prime >vay. O R&ma, there existeth on this earth not 
one that is more fortunate than thyself. Thy protector is 
even Kucika’s descendant, by whom mighty austerities have 
been performed. Do thou listen as I faithfully describe 
unto thee the ascetic pow f er of the high-souled Kau^ika. Do 

I • Jamadagni, father of Paruiurama.— T. 

16 






122 



jzAmAyana. 



thou listen unto me relating this. This righteous one was 
for a long time a king, subduing his enemies, cognizant of 
morality, acomplished, and intent upon the welfare of his 
subjects. And there was a king named Ku£a, the son of 
PrajSpati. And Ku^’s son was the powerful and pious 
Ku9an£bha. And Kuganabha's son was Gidhi. And 
Gadhi's son is the highly energetic and mighty ascetic 
Vi^wSmitra who ruled the earth. And that king reigned 
for thousands of years. And it came to pass that once 
with his four-fold forces marshalled, he set out for ranging 
the earth. And the king went on by turns ranging cities 
and kingdoms, rivers and mountains and asylums. And at 
length that foremost of conquerers, the mighty Visw&mitra, 
came upon Vasishtha's asylum furnished with various blosso- 
ming plants and trees ; abounding in animals ; inhabited by 
Siddhas and Ch&ranas*; graced by celestials and D&navas and 
Gandharbas and Kinnaras ; and filled with mild deer ; fre- 
quented by the feathered tribes ; crowded with Brahmarshis $ 
with Devarshis inhabiting it ; aye teeming with high-souled 
ones of accomplished ascetic success and resembling fire 5 
like another region of Brahm£ ; graceful •> and adorned on all 
sides with high-soulded saints and V&lakhilyas and VaikhS- 
nasas resembling Brahm&, feeding on water or air, or living 
on withered leaves, or subsisting on fruits and roots, and self- 
controlled, and free from faults, and of vanquished senses, 
and engaged in reciting mantras and performing homas. 



SECTION LH. 



XJpON seeing that foremost of those reciting mantras , 
the highly powerful and heroic VicwSmitra, exceedingly de- 
lighted, bowed unto him in humility. And having enquired 
as to the pleasantness of Visw&mitra's journey, the high- 
souled and adorable Vasishtha ordered a seat for the former. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



BlLAKlNDAM . 



x*3 



And on the intelligent Vi$wSmitra having been seated, that 
best of ascetics properly entertained him with fruits and 
roots. And having accepted Vasishtha’s hospitality, that 
foremost of monarchs, the exceedingly energetic Vi9wSraitra, 
then enquired of Vasishtha as to the welfare of his asceticism, 
his AgnihotraSi and his disciples, and his trees. Thereupon 
Vasishtha communicated the welfare of all unto that best of 
kings. Then Brahm&'s son, Vasishtha, of fierce austerities 
the best of those reciting mantras , asked V^wSmitra, seated 
at his ease, saying, — ‘O king, is it well with thee ? And, 
O king, dost thou rule thy subjects, pleasing them consistent- 
ly with royal duties? And, O virtuous one, are thy 
retainers maintained on salaries from the kingdom ? Do 
they abide by thy mandates ? And, O destroyer of foes, hast 
thou vanquished thy enemies ? And, O repressor of foes, is 
it well with thee as to, O most powerful of men, thy forces, 
exchequer, and friends, and, O sinless one, sons and grand- 
sons ?' Thereupon, the highly powerful king, Vi^wamitra, 
with humility communicated unto Vasishtha his complete 
welfare. And having conversed for a long time, those virtu- 
ous ones, experiencing exceeding joy, ministered unto each 
other’s delight. Then, O descendant of Raghu, after the 
conversation had ended, the adorable Vasishtha, smiling, ad- 
dressed Vi^wamitra, saying,— *0 highly powerful one, I desire 
to properly entertain thee of immeasurable power, as well as 
thy forces,— do thou, therefore, accept my hospitality. Do 
thou receive the hospitality which I extend unto thee. O 
king, thou art the foremost of guests, and art worthy of assi- 
duous homage.’ Being thus addressed by Vasishtha, that 
mighty ascetic, king Vi^wSmitra, said, — ‘Even by this word 
of thine relative to receiving me, hast thou in fact done so. 
And, O worshipful one, even with the fruits and roots that 
are in thy asylum, with the water for washing my feet, and 
for sipping, — yea, with the sight of thy revered self, have 
I been, O profoundly wise one, excellently entertained 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




1*4 



RlMlFANA. 



by thee, who art thyself worthy of homage. I bow unto 
thee. I will go now. Do thou regard me with a friendly 
eye. 1 As the king was speaking thus, the righteous-souled 
and generous Vasishtha again and again pressed him to ac- 
cept his hospitality. Then Gadhi's son answered Vasishtha, 
— ‘Very well. O potent ascetic, — let that be which findeth 
favor in thy sight.* This having been said by him, Vasishtha, 
the best of those reciting mantras , joyfully called his sacri- 
ficial dappled cow, whose sins had been washed away, — ‘O 
Savala ! do thou come soon ; and hear my words. I intend 
to entertain this royal saint together with his forces. Do 
thou enable me to entertain him,by yeilding excellent viands. 
And, O divine one, O thou that conferrest everything that 
is desired, do thou grant everyone whatever he asketh 
among edibles impregnated with the six tastes. And do 
thou, O Savala, speedily create sapid viands to be chewed, 
sucked, licked or drunk 1 .” 



SECTION LI I I. 



A HUS addressed by Vasishtha, that bestower of all that 
was desired, Savala, O destroyer of thy foes, brought forth 
everything that was desired by everyone. And she produced 
sugarcanes, and honey, and fried rice, and excellent Mairey - 
as ,* and costly drinks, and various viands, and heaps of warm 
rice resembling hills, and other kinds of edibles, and soups, 
and Dadhtkulyds , t together with silver plates by thousands 
filled with meats of diverse tastes. And, O Rama, that army 
of Vi^wamitra consisting of cheerful and stout men being 
superbly entertained by Vasishtha, became exceedingly 
gratified. And the royal saint, V^wamitra himself, together 
with the priests and Brahmanas and the inmates of the inner 

* A kind of wine prepared from molasses. — T. 
t A preparation of milk and rice. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





bAlakAndam. 



12 $ 



apartment, was also heartily filled. And being hospitably 
entertained with his courtiers and counsellors and retai- 
ners, he, exceedingly delighted, spoke unto Vasishtha, saying, 
—‘Received and excellently entertained have I been by thee,0 
BrShmana, who thyself art worthy of being honored. Do thou, 

0 thou conversant with speech, listen to me. I will tell thee a 
word. Do thou bestow on me Savala for an hundred thousand 
kine. O worshipful one, varily this one is a jewel ; and 
as it is the function of kings to acquire jewels, do thou confer 
on me Savala ; for, O twice-born one, this one by right be- 
longs unto ifie.* Thus addressed by V^wSlmitra the righteous 
and adorable Vasishtha — best of ascetics — replied unto that 
lord of earth, — ‘O king, neither for an hundred thousand 
nor for an hundred koti of kine, nor yet for heaps 
of silver, will I part with Savala. O subduer of enemies, 
this one deserves not to be separated from my side. 
Even like unto the fame of the mighty, this Savala is ever 
joined with me. My oblations to the gods and the Pitris as 
well as my subsistence itself are established even in her. 
And my Agnihotras ,* Va/t \ t and Homa% depend uper her; 
and, O royal saint, my Svdhdkdras and V ashatkdras\ as 
well as my various lore depend upon her. All this is so : 
there is no doubt about it. Verily she is my all ; and in her 
do I find my delight. And many are the reasons, O king, why 

1 cannot give unto thee Savala Thus addressed by Vasish- 
tha, that one versed in speech, Vifwamitra, eagerly rejoined,— 
*1 shall confer upon thee fourteen thousand elephants decked 
in gold chains and gold neck-ornaments and hooks ; and I 
will confer upon thee eight hundred golden cars furnished 
with bells and each yoked with four white horses ; 



* Maintainance of the perpetual fire. — T. 
f Offerings to the spirits of air. — T. 
t Burnt offerings. — T. 

5T Sacrifices performed with the exclamation of Swdhh and Vashat respect- 
ively. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




126 



KlMlYANA. 



and, O thou of auspicious vows, I will confer upon thee one 
thousand and ten high-mettled horses of noble breeds ; and 
I will confer upon thee a koti of youthful and variegated 
kine, — do thou grant unto me Savala. And as much of gems 
and gold, O best of regenerate ones, as thou wilt ask for, 
shall I bestow upon thee : do thou grant me Savala/ Thus 
besought by the intelligent VifwSmitra, that adorable one 
replied, saying, — r O king, Savala I will not by any means 
give. This is verily my jewel : this is verily my riches : this 
is verily my all : this is verily my subsistence. And this is 
my Darsa ,* and this my Paurnamasa , f and this my various 
sacrifices with dakshittas and, O king, this my various rites. 
This, O king, is without doubt, the root of all my rites. 
And what need of dilating ? This one bestowing everything 
that is desired will I not part with/" 



SECTION LI V. 



: 00 : 

W HEN the ascetic Vasishtha would not part with 
the cow of plenty then Vi^wSmitra, O R&ma, forced 
Savala away. And, O Rama, carried away by that high- 
souled king, Savala, stricken with grief and afflicted with 
sorrow, bethought herself, weeping, — ‘Have I been forsaken 
by the high-souled Vasistha that the royal retainers carry 
me off thus aggrieved ? What wrong have I done unto 
that mighty ascetic of concentrated spirit, that, knowing me 
to be faultless, that righteous one leaveth her that was de- 

* Bi-monthly sacrifice, performed at change of the moon by persons main- 
taining a perpetual fire. — T. 

t A ceremony performed at the full of the moon by persons maintaining a 
perpetual fire. — T. 

X Gifts to Brahmanas on occasions of sacrifice. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BXLAKlNDAM. 



127 



voted unto his service ?' Revolving this in her mind and 
sighing again and again, she darted unto where the pre-emi- 
nently energetic Vasishtha wasj and defeating those servants 
(of the king), she with the speed of the wind, appeared at the 
feet of that high-souled one. And weeping Savala having 
the voice of clouds, standing before Vasishtha, spoke in 
distressful accents, — ‘O Brahmas son, wherefore have I been 
forsaken by thee, — that the servants of the king were carry- 
ing me from off thy presence ?* Thus addressed the Brahmarshi 
said these words unto that one aggrieved, and of heart afflicted 
with sorrow, and like unto a sister, — 'O Savala, not that I 
forsake thee ; nor hast thou done me any wrong. But this 
mighty king proud of his prowess hath been carrying thee 
away. Surely, my strength is not equal to his. More speci- 
ally, he is a king, a powerful king, — more particularly, this day 
he should not be slain by me (inasmuch as he is my guest) : 
he is a Kshatriya and lord of earth. And he is foremost in 
might by virtue of possessing this entire Akshauhini abound- 
ing in elephants and horses and cars and standards, and 
pennons on elephants/ Thus addressed by Vasishtha, that 
one cognizant of words humbly said in reply unto that 
Brahmarshi of incomparable power, — ‘The might of the 
Kshatriyas is not great, — the Brahmanas are more mighty 
than they. O Brahmana, superhuman is the power of the 
Brihmanas, excelling that of the Kshatriyas. Thy power is 
immeasurable ; and the exceedingly energetic Vi9wamitra 
is not as powerful as thyself. Thy energy is unequalled. 
O highly energetic one, do thou command me bursting with 
Brahma forces : the pride, power and endeavours of that 
wicked one will I bring down.’ Thus accosted by her, the 
highly famous Vasishtha, O R§ma, said, — ‘Create thou forces 
capable of crushing the forces of the enemy/ Hearing 
those words of his, Suravi created (an army). And, O king, 
Pahlavas by hundreds brought into being by her lowing, 
begin even in V^xvamitra’s sight to commit havoc upon his 



Digitized by 



Google 




128 



RlMlYANA. 



forces. Thereat, exceedingly angered, with eyes expanded 
in ire, that king commenced to slay the Pahlavas with various 
weapons. And beholding the Pahlavas by hundreds afflicted 
by VigwSmitra, she again created grim-visaged Sakas mixed 
Yavanas. And the field became thronged with the Sakas 
mixed with Yavanas, of dazzling splendour, exceedingly fierce 
resembling golden filaments, bearing sharp scimitars and 
adzes, and clad in yellow apparel. And that entire host (of 
V^wSmitra) was being consumed by them like unto flaming 
fires. Then the exceedingly powerful Vi^wamitra hurled 
weapons at them ; and with these the Yavanas, Kamvoyas 
and Varvaras* became sore afflicted. ,, 



SECTION LV. 



66 A 

J\ ND beholding them sore harassed, and overwhelmed 
by Vi9wSmitra , s weapons, Vasishtha directed (Saval£) say- 
ing, — ‘O cow of plenty, do thou create (fresh troops), through 
thy Yoga power/ And from her roar, there came into being 
Kamvojas, resembling the Sun. And from her udders sprang 
Varvaras, arms in hand ; and from her mysterious parts, 
Yavanas ; from her anus, Sakas ; and from the pores of her 
skin, those barbarians, — HSritas and Kir£tas. And, O des- 
cendant of Raghu, anon V^wSmitra’s entire host consisting 
of foot, and elephant, and horse, and car, was exterminated 
by them. And seeing the army annihilated by the high- 
souled Vasishtha, the hundred sons of Vi9w2Lmitra, equipped 
with various weapons, rushed in high ire against that best of 
mantra - reciting ones. Thereupon, uttering a roar, that mighty 
ascetic consumed them quite. And in a moment, Vi^w^mitra’s 
sons together with horse and car and foot were reduced to 
ashes by the high-souled Vasishtha. And witnessing them 
all destroyed, together with the army, the illustrious Vifwa- 

* Barbarians. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





bXlakXndam. 



1*9 

mitra, covered with shame, became plunged in thought ; and 
like unto a tideless ocean or a fangless snake, he instantly be- 
came shorn of his effulgence, like unto the sun overwhelmed by 
R5hu.* And deprived of his forces and sons, he appeared like 
a bird bereft of its wings ; and losing his entire army and with 
it the high spirits that it had inspired him with, his heart died 
within him. Then entrusting one of his (remaining) sons 
with the sovereignty, saying, — ‘Do thou rule the earth agree- 
ably to the duties of the Kshatriya/ he went into the forest. 
And repairing to the side of the- Himavat inhabited by 
Kinnaras and Serpents, that one of mighty asceticism began 
to perform austerities with the view of propitiating Mah&de- 
va. And on a certain occasion that lord of the celestials, 
Vrishadwaja,t intending to confer a boon, appeared be- 
fore the mighty ascetic Vi^wSmitra, — ‘What for, O king, 
art thou performing penance ? Do thou unfold what thou 
hast to say. I am for conferring a boon : do thou express 
what boon thou wouldst obtain. 1 Thus addressed by that 
god, that performer of mighty austerities, Vi^wamitra, bow- 
ing down unto him, addressed him, saying, — ‘If, O mighty 
god, thou art pleased (with me), do thou confer upon me the 
science of archery with all its mysteries and mantras , as 
well as its virtues of helping from far and near. And, O 
sinless one, may all those weapons that are with the celestials 
and the Ddnavas and the Maharshis and the Gandharbas and 
the Yakshas, and the Rakshas, shine on me ! May this my de- 
sire be granted me through thy grace, O god of gods ! There- 
upon, saying, — ‘Be it so' — the lord of the celestials vanished. 
And obtaining the arms from the lord of the celestials, the 
mighty Visw&mitra, naturally haughty became swelled with 

* A Daitya with the tail of a dragon, whose head was severed from his 
body by Vishnu ; but being immortal , the head and tail retained their separate 
existence, and being transfered to the stellar sphere, became the author of 
eclipses. — T. 

f An appellation of Siva ; meaning, who hath the bull for his vehicle.— T. 

*7 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





RlMlYANA. 



130 

insolence. And surcharged with energy, like unto the sea 
during the equinox, he considered, O R3ma, as if that fore- 
most of saints, Vasishtha, was already slain. And repairing 
to Vasishtha’s asylum, the king began to discharge weapons, 
capable of burning down the hermitage. And beholding 
those weapons discharged by the intelligent V’^wSmitra, 
the ascetics, overtaken by fear, by hundreds began to fly. 
And Vasishtha’s disciples as well as the animals and birds 
inhabiting there, fled in all directions by thousands. And for 
a time the hermitage of the high-souled Vasishtha was bare 
of living beings, and still like unto a wilderness, though 
Vasishtha cried again and again, — ‘Do not fear. To-day 
will I slay GSdhi’s son, even as the sun (destroys) mist’ 
Having said this, that best of mantra - reciting ones, Vasishtha, 
in high wrath, addressed Vi9w&mitra, saying, — ‘Since, O fool, 
thou hast destroyed this hermitage that had been prospering 
for a long time, thou of execrable ways shalt not live long/ 
Saying this, he, transported with wrath, and like unto the 
smoking flame at universal dissolution, speedily upraised a 
staff resembling another mace of Yama itself.” 



SECTION LVI . 



HUS addressed by Vasishtha, the mighty Vi^wSmitra, 
aiming a fiery weapon, said, — ‘Stay ! Stay !' The worshipful 
Vasishtha also on his part, raising a Brahma staff resembling 
another staff of KSla, exclaimed in wrath, — ‘Wretch of a 
Kshatriya ! here am I, — do thou display the might thou art 
master of. To-day, O Gadhi's son, will I humble thy pride 
of arms. Thou disgrace of thy race, where is thy Kshatriya 
might, and where my high Brahma energy ? Do thou behold 
my superhuman Brahma energy/ And even as water allayeth 
the fierceness of a flame, the Brahma staff quenched the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




dAlakAndam . 



x 3* 

energy of the powerful fiery weapon discharged by GSdhi’s 
son. Then Gadhi's son, waxing wroth, discharged Varuna 
and Raudra and Aindra and Pasupata and Aishika weap- 
ons. And, Manava, and Mohana, and Gandharba, and 
SwSpana, and Jrimbhana, and Mohana, and SanUpana, and 
ViUpana, and Soshana, and Dlruna, and Vajra hard to baffle, 
and Brahmap^a, and KalapS^a and Varunap^a, and 
Pin£ka (favorite of Siva), and the two Asanis, wet and dry, 
and the Danda weapon, and Pai^cha, and the Krauncha 
weapon, and Dharmachakra, and Kalachakra, and Vishu- 
chakra and Vayavya, and Mathana, and the Hara^ras 
weapon, and the twin Saktis, hurled he, and Kank£la, and 
Mushala, and the mighty weapon VidySdhara, and the 
terrible Kala weapon, and the dreadful Trisula weapon, and 
Kap&la, and Kankana. — all these weapons hurled he (Vi$- 
wamitra), at that best of mantra - reciting ones, O descendant 
of Raghu. And it was wonderful to behold. But Brahmas 
son baffled all those by means of his staff. And on those 
(weapons) being resisted, the son of Gadhi hurled a Brahma 
weapon. And on that weapon being discharged, the deities 
with Agni at their head, and the Devarshis, and the Gan- 
dharbas, and the mighty Serpents, became afflicted with fear. 
And on that Brahma weapon being discharged, all the three 
worlds became exceedingly alarmed. And, O Raghu's des- 
cendant, Vasishtha by virtue of his Brahma energy complete- 
ly baffled that terrible Brahma weapon. And when the 
high-souled Vasishtha had baffled the Brahma weapon, his 
form became fierce and terrible, capable of striking terror 
into the three worlds. And from the pores of his body, 
resembling a smoking flame, darted out scintillations of fire. 
And resembling another staff of Yama, the Brahma~staff rais- 
ed by Vasishtha’s arm flamed like unto the smokeless fire at 
the universal dissolution. Then the ascetics in a body fell 
to eulogizing that best of mantra - reciting ones, Vasishtha, 
saying, — ‘Thy might, O Br&hmana, is infallible. Do thou rein 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




XlAflyAA’A. 



— ~ Brahma) energy, by thy own. O Brahmana, Vi^wSmitra 
01 mighty strergth hath been subdued by thee. Infallible is 
thy extraordinary might. Let the creatures now be relieved 
from their distress/ Thus addressed, that highly energetic 
one of rigid austerities, became pacified. And Vi^wamitra, 
being put down, heaving a sigh, said, — 'Fie upon the Ksha- 
triya might : the strength begot of Brahma energy, is might 
indeed. By one Brahma staff hath all my weapons been put 
to the rout. Beholding this, I with a placid mind and senses 
will engage in mighty austerities, — which shall earn for roe 
BrShmanahood.” 



SECTION LVil. 



JL.HFN with his heart burning, in consequence of the 
remembrance of his humiliation, and having made enemies 
with that high-souled one, Vi9wSmitra of mighty asceticism 
sighing, and sighing, went towards the south, in company 
with his queen, and became engaged in dreadful austerities, 
O RSghava. And subsisting on fruits and roots, and res- 
training his senses, he performed the most rigid austerities. 
And four sons engaged in observing truth and duty — 
Havishpanda, Madhushpanda, Drihanetra, and MahSratha,* 
were born unto him. And when a thousand years had been 
completed, the Grand-sire of all, Brahma, addressed the 
ascetic, V^wSmitra in sweet words , saying, — ‘O son of 
Ku9ika, the regions of the Rajarshis have been won by 
thee through thy austerities. And on account of this thy 
asceticism, we recognize thee as a R&jarslii.’ Having said 
this, the highly energetic prime Lord of all creature went 
to the celestial regions in company with the celestials. 



• Some texts have J lahodara. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakAndarl 



33 



Hearing this, V^w&mitra hanging down his head from shame 
and possessed by a mighty sorrow, said, in piteous accents, 
— *1 have performed rigid austerities, — yet the deities and 
the saints recognise me only as a RSjarshi. 1 do not con- 
sider the fruit of my asceticism as gained/ Ascertaining 
this in his mind, that righteous and highly composed one 
of high austerities, O Kakuststha, again engaged in penances. 
And, O RSghava, it came to pass that at this time, that 
enhancer of IkshwSku's line, the celebrated and truthful 
Trisanku of subdued sense made up his mind, saying , — ( I 
will perform a sacrifice, and in body win the prime way of the 
celestials/ And summoning Vasishtha, he unfolded his mind 
unto him. And on the high-souled Vasishtha saying, — *1 
am incapable of doing this/ and disregarded by the latter, 
the King went towards the southern quarter. And with the 
view of securing success to his endeavours, the king repaired 
to where Vasishtha's sons had for a long time been per- 
forming austerities. And the highly energetic Trisanku 
saw the hundred exceedingly effulgent sons of Vasishtha 
engaged in austerities with fixed faculties. And approaching 
all those high-souled sons of his spiritual guide, and paying 
them reverence he, hanging down his head from shame, 
with clasped hands, addressed those mighty spirits, saying 
— ‘I seek protection of ye ; and I take refuge in ye capable 
of conferring it. Disregarded have I been, good betide ye, 
by the high-souled Vasishtha. I have set my heart upon 
celebrating a mighty sacrifice : it behoveth ye to command me. 
And, with the view of propitiating ye, I, lowly bowing down 
my head, beseech the sons of my spiritual guide, — Br&hmanas 
ever staying by asceticism, — do ye with collected minds offi- 
ciate in this sacrifice, so that success may be secured unto 
me ; and that in body I may attain the regions of the celes- 
tials. Disregarded by the ascetic Vasishtha, other way find 
I none, ye anchorets, except the sons of my spiritual guide. 
To the Ikshw&kus, their preceptor is their prime way. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




134 RAMAYANA. 

Therefore after him (Vasishtha), even ye are the objects 
of my adoration.*” 



SECTION LVin. 



«rr 

XIearing Trisanku’s speech, the hundred sons of the 
saint, O Rama, excited by wrath, said these words unto the 
king, — ‘Disregarded hast thou been, O thou of perverse 
understanding, by our truth-telling sire, — why, then, having 
passed him by, do thou seek for others* help ? To the 
Ikshw&kus, their spiritual guide is their prime way ; nor art 
thou capable of setting at naught the words of that truth- 
telling one. That worshipful saint said, that he was incapa- 
ble (of accomplishing this), — how can we then undertake that 
sacrifice ? Thou art ignorant, O foremost of men. Do thou 
speedily retrace thy steps. And, O king, that adorable 
one is competent to officiate at the sacrifice itself of the three 
worlds, how can we then contribute to his dishonor ?* 
Hearing those words of theirs, that king, with accents tre- 
mulous with passion, again addressed them, saying, — ‘Dis- 
regarded by that worshipful one as well as by the sons of 
my spiritual guide, I will go after another way, — so peace be 
unto ye, ascetics.* The saint’s sons, on their part, hearing 
that speech couching a fierce intent, cursed him in exceeding 
wrath, saying, — ‘Thou shalt come by ChandSla-hood.* Having 
said this, those high-souled ones entered each into his dwell- 
ing. And when the night had gone by, the king came by Chan- 
d&lahood. And clad in a blue garb, blue and rough of person, 
having a short head of hair, wearing a garland composed of 
materials culled from a cemetery, his body bedaubed with ashes 
from the same quarter, he was decked out with iron ornaments. 
And, O RSma, beholding him in the guise of a Chandila, 
his counsellors as well as followers, renouncing him, fled 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM . 



*35 



in a body. And, 0 Kakutstha, maintaining himself in pati- 
ence, the monarch burning day and night, all alone went 
unto the ascetic Vi^wSmitra. And beholding the disappointed 
king in the guise of a Chandala, the ascetic O Rama, was 
touched with pity. And from commiseration, that pre-eminently 
pious and exceedingly energetic one said unto that king 
frightful to behold, saying, — ‘Good betide thee, O heroic 
lord of Ayodhya, thou hast fallen into Chandala-hood through 
a curse, what is the purpose of thy coming, O highly 
powerful prince ?' Hearing him, the king conversant with 
words, fallen into Chandala-hood, with folded hands, said 
unto that one versed in speech, — Disregarded had I been 
by my spiritual guide as well as his sons. And far from 
attaining my desire,! came by this calamity. O thou of placid 
presence, I had desired to repair unto heaven in body. By 
me have an hundred sacrifices been performed, — but yet do 
I not obtain the fruit thereof. I have never before told an 
untruth ; and I swear by my Kshatriya morality, that albeit 
fallen on evil days, I will never do so in future, O gentle one. 
And sacrifices I have celebrated many, — and I have ruled my 
people in righteousness ; and I have pleased my preceptors 
by my character and conduct. But, O best of ascetics, now 
endeavouring to do my duty and intending to perform a 
sacrifice, I have failed in enlisting the good graces of my 
spiritual guides. Therefore do I consider Destiny as supreme; 
and action as nothing. Destiny overtaketh all : Destiny is 
the prime way. Therefore it behoveth thee to grant thy 
favor unto me extremely distressed, who crave thy favor, 
and, good betide thee, whose endeavours have been baffled 
by Destiny. Other way will I wend none ; nor is there any 
other refuge for me. It behoveth thee to meet Destiny with 
exertion*.” 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




rXmX fan a. 



136 



SECTION LIX. 



HEN the king had spoken thus, Ku^ka’s son, moved 
with pity, said these sweet words unto the king who had 
undergone Chand£la-hood, — ‘O descendant of Ikshw&ku, hast 
thou had a pleasant journey ? I know thee well, O highly 
virtuous one. Refuge will I grant thee, — so fear not, Obest 
of monarchs. I shall summon all the pious Maharshis, who 
shall assist at the sacrifice, O king, — and then thou w’ilt be 
able to accomplish thy purpose easily. And should the 
guise thou hast come by in virtue of thy preceptor's curse, 
cling to thee yet, thou wilt bodily repair unto heaven in this 
form. And since appearing before Ku^ika’s son, thou hast 
taken his refuge, I consider heaven, O lord of men, as if 
within thy grasp.* Having said this, that exceedingly 
energetic one ordered his highly virtuous and profoundly 
wise sons to provide the sacrificial necessaries. And sum- 
moning his disciples, he said, — ‘Do ye by my command 
bring hither all the saints together with Vasishtha's sons ; 
and our friends and their disciples and the family priests 
variously versed in lore. Aud should any summoned by my 
mandate, say aught, do ye fully represent unto me the ex- 
pression of slight.* Hearing his speech, they set out in 
different directions ; and Brahmav&dis* began to pour in 
from various countries. And the disciples (of Vi^wimitra) 
returning, fully communicated unto that ascetic of flaming 
energy the words of the Brahmav&dis, saying, — ‘Hearing 
thy message, the regenerate ones resident in every part will 
come hither, — and some have already arrived — all save 
Mahodaya and the hundred sons of Vasishtha. Do thou, O 
foremost of ascetics, listen to the words that they said with 
accents tremulous with emotion, — How can celestials 

• A Brahmavadi is one who maintains that all things are Spirit. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BlLAKlNDAM. 



*37 



and saints partake of offerings in the court of him that in 
addition to being a Chandala, hath for his priest a Kshatriya ? 
And how can high-souled Br&hmanas, patronized by Vicwa- 
mitra, attain to heaven, having partaken of a Chandala's 
fare ? — These cruel words, O powerful ascetic, did Vasish- 
tha's sons together with Mahodaya, utter with reddened 
eyes/ Hearing those words of theirs, that foremost of asce- 
tics, with eyes reddened in anger, wrathfully cried, — ‘Since 
blameless as I am, those wicked-minded ones censure me 
practising fierce austerities, they shall, without doubt, be 
reduced to ashes. And this very day bound by the noose of 
K&la, meeting with destruction at the hands of Vivaswata's 
son,* they shall for seven hundred births range these worlds, 
procuring dead men's clothes, always feeding on dogs'flesh, 
going by the name of Mushtikas, void of abhorrence, and 
of frightful, distorted forms and foul practices. And wicked 
Mahodaya also hath blamed me although undeserving of 
blame •> therefore, reproved of all, he shall undergo Nishada- 
hood. And becoming cruel and engaged in taking life, he 
shall through my ire fare wretchedly for a long lapse of time/ 
Having uttered this in the assembly of saints, that mighty 
ascetic, the highly powerful Vi^wamitra of fierce asceticism 
paused/ 1 



SECTION LX. 



it \ 

j9lNd knowing (by virtue of his Yoga power) Vasishtha's 
sons together with Mahodaya as destroyed in consequence 
of his ascetic energy, the highly powerful Vi^wimitra 
said in the midst of the saints, — ‘This descendant of 
lkshw&ku, the famous Trisanku, is virtuous and munificent 
and hath taken refuge in me, with the view of attaining the 

♦ Yuma. — T, 
iS 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RlMlYANA. 



138 

celestial regions in his own person. Therefore do thou 
engage with me in the sacrifice, so that he may bodily repair 
unto heaven/ Hearing Vi^wamitra's words, the pious 
Maharshis readily spoke in harmony with duty, saying, — ‘This 
descendant of Ku£ika is a highly irascible ascetic, — therefore 
what he saith should, without doubt, be performed. The 
worshipful one is like unto fire, and, if angered, may curse us. 
Therefore, let us engage in this sacrifice, so that IkshwSku’s 
descendant through the potency of Vi^wSlmitra may repair 
unto heaven in person. Then let us engage in this sacrifice/ 
Saying this, the sages entered upon the ceremony ; and in 
that sacrifice the highly energetic ViswSLmitra acted as the 
priest. And Ritwijas versed in mantras performed every 
thing in order with mantras , in accordance with scripture and 
prescription. Then after a long time, Vi^wSmitra of mighty 
austerities invoked thither all the celestials for receiving 
their respective shares j but the deities did not come to receive 
them. Thereupon, getting into a wrath, the mighty ascetic 
Vifwamitra, lifting up a ladle, wrathfully spoke unto Trisanku, 
— ‘O lord of men, do thou witness the prowess of my self- 
earned asceticism. I shall by dint of my asceticism take 
thee bodily unto heaven. And, O king, do thou in person 
repair unto heaven hard to attain. Something yet remains 
in me of the self-earned fruit of my asceticism ; and, O king, 
through the energy of that asceticism, do thou repair unto 
heaven in person/ And on the ascetic saying this, 0 
Kikutsthtf, that lord of men bodily ascended heaven in the 
very sight of the anchorets. And beholding Trisanku risen 
to heaven, the subduer of P2Lka* together with all the celes- 
tials said, — ‘O Trisanku, turn thee back. Thou hast not 
earned abode in heaven. O fool, thou hast been blighted by 
the curse of thy spiritual guide. Do thou therefore drop 
down headlong/ The great Indra having spoken thus, 
Trisanku fell down, crying unto the ascetic Vi^wSmitra, — 

• Indra. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakAndam. 



r 39 



‘Save me, save me/ Thereupon, hearing his distressful 
cries, Kau 9 ika waxed mightily wroth, and exclaimed, — ‘Stay, 
stay/ And in the midst of the ascetics, like unto another 
Prajapati, he created other seven Rishis* on the Southern 
way ; and also, overwhelmed with wrath created another 
set of stars. And colliedf with passion, that illustrious 
one in the midst of the ascetics created another system 
of stars in the southern direction. And, saying, — ‘I will 
create another Indra, or the world (that I create) shall 
be without an Indra/ And in anger, he went the length 
of creating celestials. Thereupon, in trepidation, the saints 
and the celestials and the Asuras humbly addressed the high- 
souled Visweimitra thus, — ‘This king, O highly exalted one, 
hath been visited with the curse of his preceptor, — therefore, 
O ascetic, he deserves not to ascend heaven in person/ Hear- 
ing those words of theirs, that best of anchorets, Kau^ika, 
in company with the celestials, said these pregnant words,— 
‘Good betide ye, I have vowed unto this king, Trisanku's 
bodily ascension unto heaven, — therefore, I dare not falsify 
my vow. Let Trisanku evermore dwell in heaven in person, 
and let these stars created by me verily endure as long as 
the worlds. This it behoveth ye, ye gods, to ordain. 
Thus addressed, the deities answered that best of ascetics, 
saying, — ‘So be it, good betide thee ! All these innumerable 
stars, O foremost of anchorets, shall remain in the firmament 
outside the path of Vai9w3lnara and shining in their splen- 
dour, Trisanku shall dwell with bended head, like unto an 
immortal. And all these luminous bodies shall follow that 
best of kings, illustrious and successful, as if he had attained 
heaven itself/ And the virtuous and exceedingly energetic 
Vi^wSmitra, thus assured by the celestials, said in the midst 



* Ursa major. — T. 

f “And passion having my best judgment collied .” — T. 

Othello. 



% The Zodiac. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





U9 



RlMlYANA. 



of the saints, — *Ye gods, excellent well/ Then, after the 
sacrifice had concluded, the high-souled celestials and the 
saints of ascetic wealth went to their respective regions, O 
foremost of men/ 



SECTION LX I . 



46 A 

jljlND, O puissant one, seeing those saints gone, the 
highly energetic Vi^wSmitra addressed those inhabitants of 
the forest, saying, — ‘A mighty disturbance hath happened 
in regard to the southern quarter: let us therefore repairing 
to another region, carry on austerities. Ye high-souled 
ones, in the west there are extensive tracts ; and there 
in Pushkara will we peaceably carry on our austerities. 
That asylum is really pleasant/ Having said this, that 
exceedingly energetic and mighty Muni* began to perform 
terrible austerities subsisting on fruits and roots. And it 
came to pass that at this time that mighty lord of Ayodhyl, 
Amvarisha, prepared for celebrating a sacrifice. And as he 
was sacrificing, Indra stole away his sacrificial beast. And on 
the beast being stolen, the priest said unto the king, — ‘O 
king, the beast hath been stolen (away) ; and it hath been 
lost through thy dereliction. And, O lord of men, his own 
fault destroyeth the king that faileth to protect (the subjects). 
And, O best of men, even this is the expiation : do thou, 
while the ceremony lasts, speedily bring back the beast, or 
bring a man (in its stead)/ Hearing the priest's words, that 
highly intelligent king began to range various countries 
and provinces, cities, forests, and holy asylums, searching 
for the beast, with a thousand kine (as the price thereof). 
And, O child, it came to pass that arriving at Bhrigutunga,t 

* Ascetic. — T. 

t A mountain peak. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BXLAKXNDAM. 



141 

he beheld Richika seated there in company with his wife 
and sons, O descendant of Raghu. And bowing unto that 
Brahmarshi flaming in asceticism, and propitiating him, the 
exceedingly energetic royal saint of unparalleled effulgence 
having enquired as to his complete welfare, addressed 
Richika, saying, — *0 highly pious one, O Bhrigu's son, if, in 
order that I may have a substitute for my sacrificial beast, 
thou sell thy son, my desire I shall attain. I have ranged 
every country ; but the beast I do not find. Therefore, it 
behoveth thee to part with one of thy sons for price. , Thus 
addressed the exceedingly energetic Richika replied, — ‘O 
best of men, my first-born I will in no wise dispose of/ 
Hearing the words of the high-souled Richika, their mother 
spoke unto that foremost of men, Amvarisha, saying, — ‘The 
worshipful son of Bhrigu hath said that his first-born cannot 
be disposed of, — do thou, O lord, also know that the young- 
est, Sunaka, is my favorite. Therefore my youngest son 
will I not give unto thee. O foremost of men, the eldest sons 
are generally the best beloved of their fathers ; and the 
youngest, of their mothers, — therefore the youngest I would 
retain.' And when the ascetic as well as his wife had spoken 
thus, the second son, Sunasepha, O R&ma, himself said, — 
‘My father would not sell the eldest ; nor my mother the 
youngest, — therefore I consider even the second as dispos- 
able. Do thou then, O prince, take me.' When that one 
versed in the Veda had ended, that lord of men, O mighty- 
armed descendant of Raghu, taking possession of Sunasepha, 
by paying kotis of kine, and heaps of jewels, and gold and 
silver by hundreds and thousands, went away exceedingly 
delighted. And that royal saint, the exceedingly energetic 
and highly famous Amvarisha, placing Sunasepha on his car, 
speedily set out." 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




142 



kXmAyana. 



SECTION LX:i. 



“ A 

^CjlND, O foremost of men, taking Sunasepha, that 
illustrious king at noon rested in Pushkara, O descendant 
of R§ghu. And having arrived at the excellent Pushkara, 
as the king was resting, the famous Sunasepha with an 
aggrieved heart saw his maternal uncle Vi^w&mitra in company 
with some saints engaged in asceticism. Thereupon, with a woe- 
begone countenance, and sore afflicted with fatigue and 
thirst, he, O Rama, flung himself into (V^wamitra's) lap, and 
said — ‘I have neither father, nor mother, nor relatives, nor 
friends anywhere. It therefore behoves thee, O gentle one, 
to save me in the interests of virtue, O foremost of ascetics. 
And, O best of men, thou art the protector of all, and their 
refuge. May the king have his desire and may I at the same 
time, attaining long life, and undeteriorating, gain heaven, 
having performed meritorious austerities ! Do thou with a 
delighted heart become a lord unto me that am without one. 
And, O righteous one, even as a father rescueth a son, do 
thou deliver me from this peril. 1 Hearing his words, Vi^wS- 
mitra of mighty austerities, pacifying him by every means, 
spoke unto his sons, saying, — ‘That in view of which fa- 
thers beget well-wishing sons — the compassing of welfare in 
the next world — is at hand. This youthful son of the ascetic 
craveth my protection. Do ye, ye sons, accomplish my 
desire by saving his life. Ye are all of virtuous deeds, ye 
are all engaged in the observance of righteousness,— do 
ye confer satisfaction upon Agni bv one of ye becoming the 
(sacrificial) beast of the lord of men. Thus Sunasepha will 
obtain protection, the sacrifice will be freed from hin- 
derance, the deities will be propitiated, and finally uiy 
word will be made good.* Hearing the ascetic's words, his 
sons, Madhuchchhanda and others, O foremost of men, haugh- 
tily and tauntingly answered, — ‘O lord, how, neglecting 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




bAlakAndam. 



M3 



thy own sons, thou desirest to deliver that of another ? 
This we consider as heinous, even like unto eating one's 
own flesh.' Hearing this speech of his sons, that best of 
anchorets, with eyes reddened with anger, said, — ‘Disregard- 
ing my words, ye have uttered this audacious and shocking 
speech, disclaimed by morality, and capable of causing one's 
hair to stand on end. Therefore, becoming Mushtikas, and 
living on dogs’ flesh, do ye all, even like Vasishtha's sons, 
inhabit the earth for a thousand years.' Having cursed his 
sons, that best of ascetics then, by all means cheering up the 
distressed Sunasepha as to his protection, addressed him, 
saying, — ‘Do thou donning on a zone made of Ku 9 a, and 
wearing a garland of red flowers, and bedaubing thy person 
with red sandal paste, hymn Agni with mantras , approaching 
the Vaishnava sacrificial stake ; and, O ascetic's son, (at 
the same time) chaunt these two verses in that sacrifice of 
Amvarisha. Then thou wilt attain success.' Thereupon, with 
a concentrated mind securing those two verses, Sunasepha 
speedily presented himself before that leonine monarch, 
saying, — ‘O lion of a king, O thou endued with high 
intelligence, let us without delay repair hence. And, O 
foremost of monarchs, do thou engage in the sacrifice and 
commence upon the initiation.* Hearing those words of 
the ascetic's son, the king, filled with delight, readily at once 
repaired to the sacrificial ground. And with the consent of 
his court, the king fastened Sunasepha with a Ku9a cord, 
and investing him with a crimson apparel, tethered him to 
the stake as the (sacrificial) beast. And, being bound (to 
the stake), the ascetic's son first of all duly hymned Agni, 
and next those deities, Indra and his younger brother. 
Thereupon, gratified with the excellent eulogy, the thousand- 
eyed Vasava conferred upon Sunasepha long life. And, O 
foremost of men, that king also, having completed the 
sacrifice, obtained the manifold fruit thereof through the 
grace of the thousand-eyed deity, O Rama. And, O best of 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




144 



RlMlFANA. 



men, the righteous Vi^wSmitra of mighty asceticism again 
carried on austerities at Pushkara for ten hundred years." 

SECTION LX III. 

6t A 

JjlND when the thousand years had been completed and 
the mighty ascetic had accomplished his vow, the celestials 
in a body desirous of conferring upon him the fruit thereof, 
appeared before him. And the exceedingly effulgent 
BrahmSL addressed him in soothing words; saying, — ‘Thou 
art henceforth a saint, good unto thee, — and (this eminence) 
thou hast attained through thy own laudable exertions.* 
Having spoken thus unto him, the lord of celestials returned 
to heaven. And Vi^wamitra of mighty energy became again 
engaged in rigid austerities. And, O foremost of men, it 
came to pass that after a long lapse of time that prime of 
Apsaras, Menaka, was at that time performing her ablutions 
in Pushkara, and she was observed by Ku^ika’s son, like unto 
lightning among clouds. And coming under the control of 
Kandarpa ,* the anchoret spoke unto her, saying, — ‘O Apsari, 
hath thy journey been a pleasant one 9 Do thou abide in my 
asylum. Do thou favor me ; for, good betide thee, I have 
been rendered senseless by Madana.** Thus addressed, that 
one of shapely hips began to dwell there. And mighty was 
the hinderance that befell Vi^wSmitra as regarded his asce- 
ticism, as she, O RSghava, staying in that asylum of his, 
pleasantly spent five and five years, O gentle one. And after 
this period had gone by, overwhelmed with shame and afflict- 
ed with anxiety and grief, the mighty ascetic Vi^wSLmitra 
impatiently thought, O son of Raghu, that all this mighty loss 
of austerities was the work of the celestials. And deprived of 
his senses by lust, the decade had passed away imperceptibly 
as if it were one day and night ; and this impediment stood in 

* Cupid. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





bAlakAndam. 



*45 



the way of his austerities. And heaving a sigh, that best of 
ascetics burned in repentance. And with sweet words 
renouncing the terrified and trembling Menakft standing with 
clasped hands, Kucika’s son, Vi^wamilra, O Kama, went to 
the northern mountains. And practising the Brahmacharyya 
mode of life with the intention of subduing lust, that highly 
famous one engaged in arduous austerities on the banks of 
the Kau^iki. And as he was thus engaged in profound aus- 
terities on the northern mountain, a thousand years, O Rama 
passed away. Then taking counsel together, the celestials 
and the saints appeared before ^Brahma), saying, — ‘Let 
Kucika’s son obtain the title of Maharshi. 1 Hearing the 
words of the celestials, the Grand-sire of all addressed the 
ascetic Viyw&mitra, in these sweet words, — O mighty saint, 
hast thou had a pleasant journey? Satisfied with thy fierce 
austerities, O Kau^ika, I confer upon thee the eminence of 
the foremost saintship.’ Hearing Brahma’s speech, the 
anchoret V^wSmitra bowing down thus answered the Grand- 
sire with clasped hands, — ‘The incomparable title of Brah- 
marshi is to be won by one by performing sterling works. 
And since thou hast not addressed me (by that titled, it 
appears that I have not yet succeeded in subduing my senses.’* 
Thereupon Brahma said unto him, — ‘Do thou exert thyself 
until thou conquer thy senses ? Saying this, BrahmS went to 
heaven. And when the celestials had gone, the mighty 
ascetic, Vi^wSmitra, with upraised arms, and without any 
support, and subsisting on air, began to perform penances. 
And in summer, the ascetic surrounded himself with five fires, 
and in rains remained in an uncovered place, and in winter 
day and night stood submerged in water. Thus passed by a 
thousand years of terrible penances. And on the mighty 



• The text is very faulty. The literal meaning would be, “since thou hast 

not I have subdued my senses,' which would be absurd. I have therefore 

rendered the passage freely. — T. 

*9 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





1 40 



RlMlYANA. 



ascetic Vi^wamitra being engaged in austerities, great was 
the agitation that exercised the celestials and V&sav, in 
particular. And Sakra together with the Maruts spoke unto 
RambhS these words, fraught with weal unto himself, and 
woe unto Kanaka’.” 



SECTION LXIV. 



Rambha, this mighty service thou wilt have to per- 
form in the interest of the celestials, — even to take Kau^ka 
with the witchery of love/ Thus addressed by the intelligent 
thousand-eyed deity, the Apsari, O RSma, with clasped 
palms, thus bashfully answered the chief of the celestials, — 
4 0 lord of the celestials, this mighty ascetic, VicwSmitra, is a 
terrible person ; and, without doubt, he will, O divine one, 
waxing wroth, curse me. And O god, even this is my 
fear, and therefore it behoveth thee to favor me.' Thus ap- 
prehensively addressed by her in fear, the thousand-eyed one 
answered that damsel trembling and staying with clasped 
hands, — ‘Never fear, O Rambha, good unto thee ! Do thon 
perform my bidding. Assuming the form of a coel, captivating 
the heart, I will in this spring crowned with graceful trees, 
stay by thy side in company with Kandarpa. And do thou 
adding unto thy beauty, diverse blandishments bewitch this 
ascetic, Ku^ika’s son, O gentle one V Hearing Indra's words, 
that comely damsel of luminous smiles, heightening her 
charms exceedingly, inspired ViswSmitra with desire. And 
he listened to the mellifluous strains of the coel ; and with a 
delighted heart, he beheld the fair one. Anon, listening to 
the warbling of the coel and her own incomparable singing, 
as well as beholding Rambha, the ascetic began to entertain 
doubts. And knowing for certain that it was the thousand* 
eyed deity who had devised all that, that foremost of anchor- 
ets, Kufika’s son, overwhelmed with anger, cursed Rambhft, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BXLAKlNDAM. 



147 



saying 1 ,— 1 'Since, O Rambha, thou endeavourest to seduce me 
who is bent upon subduing his anger and lust, thou shalt, O 
luckless one, remain as a stone for ten thousand years. And 
a highly energetic Br&hmana equipped with ascetic energy, 
will, O Rambha, deliver thee, stained because of my ire. 1 
Thus said that exceedingly energetic and mighty ascetic 
Vi9w5mitra, and was filled with remorse unable to contain his 
anger of heart. And in consequence of his mighty curse, 
Rambha was turned into a stone. Hearing the curse of the 
mighty saint, both Kandarpa and Indra left the place. And, 
O Rama, on account of his anger, and his sense remaining 
still unsubdued he found no rest from deterioration of ascetic 
merit. And coming by decrease of ascetic merit, he thought 
within himself, — ‘No more shall I suffer anger to exercise me, 
—nor will I ever say anything to any. And I shall not 
breathe for an hundred years ; and controlling my sense, I 
shall dry up my body. And so long as I do not attain 
Br&hmanahood as earned by my austerities, I shall suspending 
my breath and abstaining from food, stay for a long lapse of 
time. And engaged in austerities, my form will not undergo 
any deterioration. , That foremost of ascetics bound himself 
by this unparalleled vow to lead a life of such self-denial.” 



SECTION LXV . 



66 A 

J3LND forsaking the northern direction, the might y Muni, 
O Rima, betaking himself to the Eastern quarter, became 
engaged in dreadful austerities. And adopting the high vow 
of taciturnity for a thousand years, he, O Rama began to 
perform the most signal and arduous austerities. And when 
the thousaud years had been complete, many an impediment 
tried the mighty Muni staying like the trunk of a tree, yet 
could not anger enter his heart ; and firmly determined J 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




748 



X A Ml VAN A. 



to shut out anger, he, O Rama, kept his asceticism from 
deterioration. And, O foremost of the Raghus, when his vow 
of a thousand years had been observed, that one of mighty 
vows became desirous of feeding on boiled rice. And it came 
to pass O best of the Raghus that at this time Indra assuming 
the guise of a regenerate one, asked for the rice. Thereupon 
he gave it away unto the Vipra ; and when the rice had been 
thus exhausted, that worshipful one of mighty austerities 
went without food. Nor, abiding by the vow of reticence, 
did he say aught unto the Vipra. And he then again resumed 
his dumb guise, restraining his breath at the same time. And 
that puissant ascetic did dot breathe fora thousand years. And 
as he restrained his breath, vapours began to issue out of his 
head. And, at this, the three worlds being on fire became 
as if afflicted with fear. And bewildered on account of the 
energy of his asceticism, and shorn of their brightness, and 
afflicted with anguish, the Devarshis and the Gandharbas and 
the Pannagas and the Uragas and the R&kshasas in a body 
addressed the Pitamaha ,* saying, — ‘O divine one, various 
were the means by w hich we endeavoured to affect the mighty 
Muni VigwSmitra with covetuousness and lust; but for all 
that lie increaseth in asceticism. Nor do we perceive in him 
ever so little of anger or lust. And if thou do not confer 
upon him what his mind desireth to have, he will annihilate 
the thr^e worlds with all that is mobile and immobile in them. 
And the ten cardinal points are disconsolate : and nothing 
can be discovered therein. And the seas are vexed, and the 
mountains riven. And the earth shaketh, and the w r inds 
keep steadily blowing. And, O Brahmana, w r e do not know 
how to remedy, this. And every one is inactive like an infidel. 
And the three worlds look as if stupified, with their minds 
exceedingly exercised. And by virtue of that mighty saint's 
energy, the sun itself hath been deprived of his splendour. 

• Lit. grand-father. Here, a name of BrahmA meaning, the great father 
of all — T 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





BlLAKlNDAM. 



149 



Therefore, O god, against the mighty Muni bending his mind 
upon destruction, and consuming the three entire worlds like 
unto the fire raging at the universal dissolution, that exalted 
one of exceeding effulgence resembling a flame, should be 
pacified. Even should he desire the dominion of the celestial 
regions, do thou grant him his wish * Then the celestials 
with Pit&maha at their head, addressed the high-souled Vicwa- 
iritra in sweet-words, saying, — ‘welcome, O Brahmarshi ! 
well pleased have we been with thy penances. And, O son 
of Ku9ika, in consideration of thy fiery asceticism, thou hast 
obtained BrShmana-hood. And, O BrShmana, I will in com- 
pany with the Maruts confer on thee long life. Hail unto 
thee ! Do thou accept this, good betide thee. Go thou, O 
gentle one, as thou likest ? Hearing Pitamaha's speech, the 
mighty ascetic, bowing down unto the celestials, said in 
delight, — ‘If Br&hmana-hood hath really been obtained by me 
together with length of days, let Omkara and Vashatkdra 
and the Vedas crown me ; and let, ye gods, that foremost of 
those versed in Kshatra Veda as well as of those cognizant 
of the Brahmaveda, even Brahma's son, Vasishtha, recognize 
me. Having granted this prime desire of mine, do ye go 
away, ye gods.' Then pacified by the celestials, that best 
of reciters, the Brahmarshi Vasishtha, made friends (with 
Vi^wamitra), saying , — ‘So be it/ ‘Thou art a Brahmarshi. 
There is no doubt about this. And every thing hath been com- 
passed in thy behalf,' — having said this, the deities went to 
their respective regions. And that Brahmarshi, the righteous 
ViswUmitra also, having attained excellent Brahmana-hood, 
paid his homage unto that best of reciters, Vasishtha ; and 
having secured his end, began to range the entire world, 
staying in asceticism. In this wise, O Rama, was Br&hmanya 
actually obtained by the high-souled one. This, O R5ma, is 
the foremost of ascetics,— this one is Asceticism incarnate. 



* Some texts read matam , for mattas — meaning- the same. — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 



RlUlFANA. 



150 

This one ever abideth by duty ; and he is the stay of ascetic 
energy.” 

Having said this, that best of regenerate persons paused. 
Hearing SatSnanda's narration delivered in the presence of 
R5ma and Lakshmana, Janaka with clasped hands addressed 
the son of Ku^ika, saying, — ‘Blessed and favored am I, 
that thou, O Kau9ika, accompanied with K9kutstha, hast 
arrived at my sacrifice, O puissant anchoret. Purified am I, 
O BrShmana, by thy very sight, O mighty Muni . And from 
thy sight have I received various qualities. O BrShmana, thy 
mighty austerities have been related in detail ; and myself as 
well as the high-souled RSLma have listened to the narration 
relative to thy formidable ascetic energy ; and the assembled 
courtiers have heard of thy various perfections. Immeasur- 
able is thy asceticism ; and immeasurable thy power ; and ever 
immeasurable thy qualities, O Ku^ika’s son. I never, O lord, 
am tired of listening to that wonderful narration. Now, O fore- 
most of ascetics, the hour for performing the daily devotions 
hath arrived, and the solar disc hangeth aslope. To-morrow 
morning, O highly energetic one, thou wilt see me again. 
Welcome, best of reciters. Itbehoveth thee to favor me.” 
Thus addressed, that best of ascetics, extolling that powerful 
one, well pleased, dismissed the delighted Janaka. Thus 
accosted, Mithil&'s lord, Vaideha, in company with his priests 
and friends, went round that foremost of ascetics. And the 
righteous V^wSmitra also together with R&ma and Lakshma- 
na, having been honored by the high-souled ones, took up 
their quarters there. 



SECTION L X V I. 

The next morning, which happened to be bright, the 
lord of men, having performed his daily devotions, welcomed 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKANDAM. 



151 

VicwcLmitra and R&ghava. And having, in accordance with 
the; scriptures, paid homage unto the former as well as the 
two high-souled RSghavas, that virtuous one said, — “Hail, O 
worshipful sir ! What shall I do unto thee, O sinless one 
Do thou command. Surely, I deserve to be commanded by thee. 
Thus addressed by the high-souled Janaka, that first of ascetics 
endowed with a righteous soul, well versed in speech, answer- 
ed, — "These sons of Da$ar&tha — Kshatriyas — famed among 
men, are eager to behold that best of bows, that lies with thee. 
Do thou show it unto them, may it be well with thee ! Hav- 
ing obtained a sight of that bow, the king’s sons, their desires 
crowned with success, will return as they list.” Thus accost- 
ed, Janaka replied unto the mighty Muni , saying, — “Listen 
to why the bow lieth here. There was a king known by the 
name of DevarJta. He was the elder brother of Nimi. And, 
O worshipful one, this bow was consigned unto the hands of 
that high-souled one as a trust. Formerly with the view of 
destroying Daksha’s sacrifice, the puissant ( Siva ), drawing 
this bow, sportively spoke unto the celestials in ire, saying,— 
‘Since, ye gods, ye deny me the shares ( of this sacrifice), 
which 1 lay claim to, I will with my bow even sever those 
heads of yours/ Thereat, O powerful ascetic, with agitated 
hearts, the deities fell to propitiating that lord of the celes- 
tials, — and Bhava was pleased w'ith them. And well-pleased 
with them, he conferred this upon those high-souled ones. 
And even this is that jewel of a bow belonging to the 
high-souled god of gods, and which was ultimately, O lord, 
consigned as a trust unto our ancestor. And as I was plough- 
ing the mead, arose a damsel, — and as I obtained her while 
hallowing the field (for sacrifice), she hath come to be known 
by the name of Sit*. And arising from the earth, she grew 
as my daughter. And unsprung from the usual source, she 
was then established here as my daughter, whose hand must 
be obtained by bending the bow. And O foremost of ascetics, 
many a king, coming here, had saught to obtain my growing 



Digitized by 



Google 




* 5 * 



rXmXyana . 



daughter arisen from the earth. But, O worshipful one, 
in consideration of her being one whose dower must be 
prowess in bending the bow. I would not bestow my daughter 
upon those lords of earth seeking for the damsel. Thereupon 
O puissant anchoret, all the kings in a body began to 
flock to Mithila, desirous of being acquainted with the strength 
of the bow. And on their being curious ( as to the bow ), I 
showed it unto them ; but they could neither hold nor wield 
it. And, O mighty Muni y finding those powerful kings to be 
but endowed with small prowess, I passed them by. Hear 
what then befell, O thou of ascetic wealth. Then, O power- 
ful anchoret, in high ire, the kings, doubtful as to their 
strength in stringing the bow, laid siege to MithiU. And those 
potent princes, conceiving themselves as frustrated by me, 
began to harass the city of Mithila, waxing wondrous wroth. 
And when a year had been completed, my defensive resourc- 
es were entirely exhausted, — and at this, I was exceedingly 
aggrieved. Then I sought to propitiate the deities ; and well- 
pleased, the celestials granted me a Chaturanga army. 
At length those wicked kings, meeting with slaughter, broke 
and fled in all directions, together with their adherents, be- 
reft of vigor, and confidence in their strength. And, O 
puissant ascetic, this highly effulgent bow will I show unto 
R&ma and Lakshmana., O thou of excellent vows. And, if, 
O ascetic, R&ma succeeds in fixing string to it, I will confer 
upon DacarStha’s son my daughter Sita, unsprung from the 
usual source . 11 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



•53 . 



SECTION LXVII. 



Hearing Janaka ’ s words, the mighty Muni Vifw5- 
mitra said unto the king, — “Do thou show the bow unto 
Rlma.” Thereupon the king Janaka commanded his minis- 
ters, saying, — “Do ye bring the wonderful bow furnished 
with unguents and garlands.” Commanded by Janaka, the 
ministers entered the city j and placing the bow in their 
front, those, endowed with immeasurable energy, came out 
And deposited in a case on a cart borne upon eight wheels, 
it was with difficulty drawn along by five thousand stalwart 
persons of well-developed frames. And having brought that 
case of iron, wherein lay that bow, the royal counsellors 
spoke unto Janaka resembling an immortal, saying, — “Here 
is the best of bows, O king, worshipped of all sovereigns. 
O foremost of kings, O lord of MithilS, if you think it worth 
showing (shew it).” Hearing theirspeech,the king with clasped 
palms said unto the high-souled Vi^wSraitraas well as R&ma 
and Lakshmana, — “This best of bows, O BrShmana, hath 
always been worshipped by the Janakas ; as also by mighty 
kings incapable (of wielding and stringing it.) And neither the 
celestials, nor the Asuras, nor the R&kshasas, nor the Gan- 
dharbas nor the Yakshas, nor the Kinnaras, nor the mighty 
UragSs, — how shall men fare ? — have succeeded in stringing 
or stretching it, or fixing the arrow to it, or pulling its string* 
or wielding it. This foremost of bows hath been brought 
here, O chief of ascetics. Do thou, O exalted one, show it 
unto these sons of the king.** Hearing Janaka,s words, the 
righteous VicwSLmitra said unto R&ghava, — “O Rlma, do thou, 
my child, behold the bow.” At the words of the Maharshi, 
Rtma, opening the case, wherein lieth the bow took a sight of 
it and said, — “This divine bow will I touch with my hand, — 
and shall I also strive to wield and draw it ?” Thereat both the 
20 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




*54 



RAmIYANA. 



king and the ascetic said, — “Excellent well/' At the words of 
the anchoret, in the sight of countless thousands of specta- 
tors, the righteous son of Raghu with exceeding ease took hold 
of the bow by the middle, and fixed the string upon it, — and 
having fixed the string, drew it. And that foremost of men 
enjoying high fame, snapped the bow in the middle. And 
mighty was the sound that was heard on the occasion, like 
unto the bursting of a thunder-clap : and the earth trembled 
terribly, as it doth in the vicinity of a mountain splitting; and 
Overwhelmed by the noise, all rolled head over heels, with the 
exception of that best of ascetics, the king, and the two 
Raghavas. And on the people being reassured, the king con- 
versant with’speech, his apprehension removed, with folded 
hands addressed that puissant ascetic, saying, — “O worship- 
ful one, I have beheld the prowess of Da9aratha’s son. This 
is verily wonderful and inconceivable ; and I did not think 
this was possible. And my daughter, Sita, being united with 
her lord, Da^aratha's son, R§ma, will shed lustre on Janaka’s 
line. And my promise viz ., that I will confer SitS upon him that 
will bend the bow, hath been fulfilled, O son of Ku^ka. And 
this Sita, this my daughter, dearer unto me than life will 
1 confer upon Rima. And, O BrShmana, by thy permission 
let my counsellors speedily post hence, O Kau^ika, good 
betide thee unto Ayodhya, in cars ; and with humble speech 
bring the king unto my capital. And let them communicate 
unto him all about the bestowal of £it& upon R&ma, in 
consequence of his having bent the bow. And let them 
acquaint the monarch with the welfare of the Kakutsthas 
protected by the ascetic ; and let them, speedily posting 
hence, bring the delighted king.” And thereupon Ku^ika’s son 
said, — “So be it.” And the righteous king, summoning his 
counsellors, despatched them to Ayodhy& with his letter, to 
communicate all duly unto the king, and bring him thither. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




BiZ A KIND AM. 



*55 



(SECTION LX VI 1 1 . 



Thus commissioned by Janaka, the envoys, having 
spent three nights on the way, entered the city of AyodhyS, 
with their conveyance afflicted with fatigue. And in ac- 
cordance with the royal commission, entering the king’s resi- 
dence, they s£w the aged king; Da^aratha, resembling a 
celestial. And freed from apprehension, the envoys with 
clasped hands addressed the monarch in sweetly humble 
accents, saying, — “O mighty monarch, MithilSL’s lord king 
Janaka, in company with his priests, in sweet and affec- 
tionate words, repeatedly enquires after the complete 
welfare of thyself along with thy priests and servants. And 
after having enquired after thy complete welfare, Mithi- 
la's lord, Vaideha, by permission of Kaufika. addresses thee 
thus, — ‘Thou knowest the vow I had made formerly— viz % 
to confer my daughter upon him that would bend the bow,— 
and the kings, in consequence of their having been deprived 
of prowess, and being baffled, have come to entertain spite 
against me. And that daughter of mine, O king, hath been 
won by thy son arrived here at will, headed by Vi^wamitra. 
And, O mighty-armed one, that divine, jewelled bow hath 
been snapped in the middle by the high-souled Rama in the 
midst of £ large assembly. And upon that high-souled one 
should I confer Sit§, having prowess assigned for her dower. 
And in this wise will I free myself from my vow* and this thou 
shouldst permit. And, O mighty king, do thou, good betide 
thee, come speedily, headed by thy priests. It behoveth 
thee to see the R£ghavas ; and, O foremost of kings, to see 
me delivered from this vow. And do thou attain the joy 
incident to the nuptials of both thy sons/ — thus spoke sweet- 
ly the lord of Videha, permitted by Vi^w&mitra Snd staying 
by the opinions of Sat&nanda.” Hearing the words of the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




156 



RlMlyANA. 



envoys, the king, exceedingly rejoiced, addressed Vasishtha 
and VSmadeva, as well as his counsellors, saying, — “Pro- 
tected by Ku^ika's son, that enhancer of Kau^aly&’s joy 
stayeth in Videha in company with his brother Lakshmana. 
And the high-souled Janaka hath witnessed the prowess of 
K&kutstha ; and he wisheth to bestow his daughter upon 
R3ghava. If this alliance with the high-souled Janaka is 
relished by ye, we shall speedily repair to his capital. Let 
there be no waste of time/' Thereupon, the counsellors along 
with the Maharshis said, — “Excellent \'* And the king 
highly delighted, said unto the counsellors, — “Our journey 
commenceth on the morrow/* And excellently ministered 
unto, the counsellors of that foremost of monarchs (Janaka\ 
endowed with every excellent quality, spent that night in 
joy. 



SECTION LX I X . 



Then when the night had been spent, king Da^aratha 
accompanied with his priests 5nd adherents, well pleased 
spoke unto Sumantra, saying, — “To-day let the officers in 
charge of the treasury, taking plenty of excellent wealth, and 
furnished with various gems, go in advance under proper 
escort. And let the fore-fold forces sally out with speed. 
And at my command let horses and conveyances and elegant 
vehicles march out. And let Vasishtha and V^madeva and 
Jivali and KS^yapa and MSrkandeya endowed with long life 
and the saint KatySLyana — let these regenerate ones go for- 
ward. And do thou also yoke my car. Let not the proper 
time pass away ; for the envoys urge speed upon me.” At 
these words of the king, the four-fold forces together with 
the saints went in the wake of the monarch. And after hav- 
ing passed four days on the way, they arrived at Videha- 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




BlLARlNDAM. 



>57 



And hearing of Da£aratha’s arrival, the auspicious king 
Janaka experienced great delight, and having obtained the 
aged king Dagaratha, he honored him duly * And that best 
one (Janaka) spoke words unto that delighted chief of men. 
“Hath thy journey been a pleasant one, O best of men ? By 
luck have I obtained thee, O descendant of Raghu. Do thou 
experience the joy earned by the prowess of thy sons. And by 
luck it is that I have obtained the highly energetic and wor- 
shipful saint Vashistha accompanied by the foremost regener- 
ate ones, like him of an hundred sacrifices, by the celestials. 
By luck it is that I have overcome the obstacle ; by luck it 
is that my race hath attained renown, in consequence of alliance 
with those endowed with prowess, the exceedingly potent 
RSghavas. O lord of men, to-morrow morning, after the com- 
pletion of the sacrifice, do thou perform the nuptials, in company 
with the foremost of the saints.” Hearing his speech in the 
midst of the saints, that best of those conversant with words, 
the lord of men, replied unto the monarch, saying, — “ A gift 
should be accepted, — this I heard formerly. And what thou 
sayest, O thou cognizant of duty, will we accomplish.” Hear- 
ing these words of the truthful (king), chiming in with morality 
and conducive to fame, the lord of Videha was filled with 
admiration. Then the ascetics experiencing great delight, 
passed the night happily in each other's company. And the 
king, overjoyed on beholding his sons, the Raghavas — passed 
(the night) in exceeding delight, splendidly entertained of 
Janaka. And the exceedingly energetic Janaka also, versed in 
men and things, having in accordance with the ordinance com- 
pleted the sacrifice and performed all the preliminary rites 
relative to the nuptials of his daughters, reposed for the night. 



* The text: And. hearing of Dasaratha’s arrival , the auspicious king Janaka 
honored him duly ; and having obtained the aged monarch Dasaratha, he being 
delighted experienced the excess of joy. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





RlMll’ANA. 



> 5 ? 



SECTION LXX. 



Then next morning Janaka skilled in speech, having 
in company with the Maharshis performed his daily duties, 
addressed the priest Satananda, saying, — “My highly ener- 
getic, puissant and eminently righteous brother known by the 
name of Ku9adhwaja dwelleth in the auspicious city, S2nk£- 
9y5, whose ramparts are ranged round with pointed weapons, 
and which is laved by the river Ikshumati, and which re- 
sembles the celestial regions or the aerial car, Pushpaka. I 
wish to see him, and he is in charge of my sacrifice. And 
that highly energetic one will partake with me the joy of 
this occasion.” This having been said unto Sat£nanda, 
some competent persons presented themselves ; and Janaka 
commanded them (to set out) for S£nka9y$. And commanded 
by the monarch, off they went, mounting on fleet coursers, 
with the view of bringing over that best among men, like 
Vishnu at the mandate of Indra. And arriving at S&nk§ 9 yS, 
they presented themselves before Ku^adhwaja. and faithfully 
delivered unto him the intention of Janaka. And hearing the 
tidings conveyed by those foremost of envoys endowed with 
great fleetness, Ku^adhwaja set out at the mandate of the 
monarch. And on coming to Videha, he appeared before 
the high-souled Janaka addicted to righteousness. And 
saluting ,Sat£nanda as well as the eminently virtuous Janaka, 
he sat down on an excellent and superb seat worthy of 
a king. And having been seated, both the heroic brothers 
of immeasurable splendour addressed that foremost of 
counsellors, SudSmana, saying, — “Go, foremost of coun- 
sellors, and speedily bring over the irrepressible Ikshwiku 
of immeasurable splendour along with his sons and ministers.” 
Thereupon, repairing to the camp he saw that enhancer 
of the race of the Raghus, and saluting him with bended 
head, addressed him, — “O heroic lord of AyodhyS, Vaideha, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BlLAKXNDAM . 



*59 



the master of Mithila, hath wished to see thee along 
with thy priests." Hearing the words of that best of coun- 
sellors, the king accompanied by the saints and his adherents 
came to Janaka. And in company with his counsellors, 
and preists and adherents, the king-foremost of those skilled 
in speech — spoke unto Vaideha, saying, — “O mighty king, 
thow knowest that the worshipful saint Vasishtha is the 
spiritual guide of our race ; and in every ceremony that we 
undertake, he it is who serves the function of a spokes- 
man. And permitted by Vi^wSmitra along with all the M&- 
harshis, even this one of a righteous soul will ‘relate my 
genealogy." And on Da£aratha resuming silence, the wor- 
shipful saint Vasishtha, versed in speech, spoke unto Vai- 
deha in company with his priests, saying — “The perpetual, 
everlasting, and undeteriorating Brahma sprang from the 
Unmanifest (Brahma). From him sprang Maricha ; and 
Ka^yapa is son unto Maricha. And from Kasyapa 
sprung Vivaswat ; and Manu is son unto Vivaswat * This 
Manu is otherwise called Prajapati ; and Ikslnvaku is Manu’s 
son. And this Ikshw&ku, thou must understand, was the 
first king of Ayodhya. And Ikshvvaku’s son, it is well 
known, was the graceful Kukshi. And Kukshi’S son was the 
graceful Vikukshi + And Vikukshi’s son was the exceedingly 
energetic and powerful V&na. And V&na's son was the 
highly energetic and powerful Anaranya. From Anaranya 
sprang Prithu ; and from Prithu, Trisanku. And Tri- 
sanku’s son was the highly famous Dhundumara. And from 
Dhundum&ra sprung the Mah&ratha, Yuvanasya. And 
from Yuvanacya sprung MandhSta, lord of earth. And 
M&ndhat&’s son was the graceful Susandhi. And Susan- 
dhi's two sons were Dhruvasandhi and Prasenajit. And 



• The Bengal Text reads : From Maricha sprang Angiras ; and his 

son was Prachetas ; and Manu is Prackstas ' son. — T. 

f The Bengal Text : From Ikshwaku sprung Vikukshi . — T 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





RAMlYANA 



160 

From Dhruvasandhi sprung the famous Bharata. And 
from Bharata sprung Asita ; to fight whom were born as 
hostile kings, those heroes, the Haihayas, the Tala- 
janghas, and the Sasavindas. And engaged in conflict 
with them, that king fled (from his kingdom); and repairing 
to the Himavat in company with his two consorts, the feeble 
Asita there paid his debt to Nature. The story runs that 
his two wives were in the family-way ; and that with the in- 
tention of destroying the embryo of the other, one of them 
administered poison unto the former mixed in her food. And 
it came tq pass that at this time, Bhrigu’s son, the ascetic 
Chyavana, had become addicted to the romantic Himavat— 
foremost of mountains. And here one of these exalted 
dames with eyes resembling lotus-petals, saluting Bhrigu’s 
son shining like a celestial, desired of him an excellent son. 
And drawing near unto that sage, K&lindi saluted him. 
And that Vipra said unto her, who was desiring of having 
a son born of her, — “In thy womb, O exalted one, will be 
speedily boro an excellent son mixed up with poison, high- 
ly powerful, and exceedingly energetic, and possessed of 
mighty strength, and gracefuL Therefore, do thou not 
grieve, O thou of lotus-eyes/* And having paid reverence 
unto Chyavana, that chaste and worshipful princess, although 
bereft of her husband, gave birth to a son. And since 
intending to destroy her foetus she that was co-wife with her 
had administered poison unto her, Sagara * was born to- 
gether with the poison. 

And Sagara’s son was Asamanja,and Asamanja’s An^mSt. 
And Dilipa was son unto Anyumat, and Bhagiratha 
unto Dilipa. And from Bhagiratha sprang Kakutstha, and 
from Kakutstha, Raghu. And Raghu’s son was the puissant 
Pravridha, feeding on human flesh ; and he came finally 



* Gar a, poison . Sagara means, with poison , i. e. here, one bom with 
poison . — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





bIukXndam. 



i 6 i 



to be known by the name of KalmStshap&da.* And from him 
sprung Sankhana. And Sudar^ana was Sankbana's, and 
Agnivarna was Sudarcana's son. And Sighraga was Agni- 
vama's, and Maru was Sighraga's sou. And Maru’s son 
was Pra^ucruka, and from Pra^ucruka sprung Amvarisha. 
And Amvarisha's son was Nahusha, lord of earth. And 
Nahusha's son was YayJti, and Yay&ti’s was NabhSga. And 
N&bh3ga's son was Aja, and from Aja sprung Da 9 aratha. 
And from this Da^aratha have come the brothers Rama and 
Lakshmana. And it is in the interests of Rama and Laksh- 
mana belonging to the heroic and truthful and pious sovereigns 
sprung in the Ikshwaku line, and possessing purity of race 
even from the time of their founder, that, O king, we solicit 
the hands of thy daughters. And, O foremost of men, it be- 
lioveth thee to confer like brides upon like bridegrooms.” 



(SECTION LX X I , 



W HEN Vasishtha had spoken thus, Janaka with clasped 
hands answered unto him, saying, — “It bchoveth thee 
to listen unto our genealogy as related by myself. In the 
matter of disposal of daughters, O foremost of anchorets, 
one's own line should be described by one boasting of a 
noble ancestry. Do thou then, O mighty-minded one, listen 
to the same. There was a king famed over the three worlds 
by h is own acts — Nimi — eminently pious and the foremost 
of those endowed with strength. And his son was 
named Mithi, and Mithi’s son was Janaka. And from this 

* He incurred Vasisbtha’s curse, and was turned into R&kshasa. He took 
vp water, intending to clear scores with Vasishtha; but at the request of his 
wife, desisted, pouring down the water at his own feet. Hence the name of 
Kalmashapada. — T. 

21 



Digitized by 





if) 2 



XAmAFANA. 



king Janaka have we derived that word as applied to every 
one of us. And from Janaka sprang Udavasu ; and Udavasu’s 
son was the pious-souled Nandivardhana. And Nandivardhan's 
son was the heroic Suketu. And Suketu's son was the 
mighty and righteous Devarata. And the Rajarshi Devarita’s 
son was Vrihadratha. And Vrihadratha's son was the heroic 
and puissant Mahavira. And Mahavira* s son was Sudhriti, 
endowed with fortitude and having truth for prowess. And 
Sudhriti's son was the pious-spirited and eminently righteous 
Dhritaketu. And the Rajarshi Dhritaketu*s son was 
Haryya^ya. And Haryya9ya’s son was Maru ; and Maru’s 
son was Pratindhaka. And Pratindhaka*s son was the righte- 
ous king Kirtiratha. And Kirtiratha’s son was Devamirha, 
and Devamirha’s, Vibudha, and Vibudha’s Mahidhraka. And 
Mahidhraka’s son was king Kirtiratha endowed with great 
strength. And the Rajarshi Kirtiratha had MoharomSL born 
unto him ; and MoharomS, the virtuous SarnaromS. And 
the Rajarshi Sarnaroma had HraswaromS born unto him. 
And this high-souled king conversant with morality had 
two sons : the elder, myself, the younger, even my brother, 
the heroic Ku9adhwaja. And installing in the kingdom 
myself, who was the elder son, and consigning unto my care 
Ku9adhwaja, our father sought the forest. And on my aged 
sire ascending heaven, I righteously ruled the kingdom and 
cherished my brother Ku9adhwaja resembling a celestial, with 
the eye of affection. And it came to pass that on one 
occasion a certain powerful king named Sudhanw§ came from 
the city of Sanka9ya before MithilSL intending to lay seige 
to it. And he sent word unto me, saying, — ‘Do thou give 
me the all-excellent bow of Siva, as well as thy daughter, the 
lotus-eyed Sit2L* And in consequence of my not granting 
him either, king SudhanwS, O Brahmarshi, entered into 
hostilities with me ; but he was both defeated and slain by 
me in the encounter. And, O foremost of ascetics, slaying 
4ing Sudhanw£, I installed in Sank§9ya my heroic brother 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bAlakAndam. 



163 

Kugadhwaja. This one, O mighty anchoret, is my younger 
brother, and I am his elder. O powerful ascetic, well pleased 
will I confer on thee these as thy daughters-in-law, — Sita on 
Rlma, good betide thee, and Urmila on Lakshmana. And, 
I take oath thrice that, without doubt, I will with a glad 
heart confer upon thee, O potent ascetic, as thy daughters- 
in-law my second daughter Urmila and also Sita resembling 
the daughter of a celestial, having prowess assigned for her 
dower. Do thou now, O king, perform the ceremony Godana 
of the nuptials of R&ma and Lakshmana ; and also perform 
their ancestral rites, good unto thee ; and then complete the 
marriage ceremony. To-day the star Magha is on the ascendant. 
On the third day, my master, when the Phalgunawill be on 
north, do thou, O monarch, perform the marriage ceremony. 
Do thou now, however, dispense gifts for invoking blessings 
upon R§ma and Lakshmana.” 



SECTION L X X I I . 



HEN Vaideha had spoken thus, the mighty ascetic 
Vi£w§mitra in company with Vasishtha addressed that heroic 
king, saying, — “O puissant one, the lines of the Ikshwakus and 
the Vaidehas are exceedingly noble and incomparable. No 
other race can by any means compare with them. And, O 
monarch, this youthful union of Rama and Lakshmana with 
Sita and Urmila is fit by all means ; and it is worthy of their 
wealth of grace. Now do thou, O foremost of men, listen to 
my words. This youthful brother of thine, king Ku9adhwaja, 
O thou versed in morality, this pious-souled one, O king, hath, 
O prime of men, a couple of daughters, unparalleled on* 
earth in beauty, whom we would ask for, to become wives 
unto the prince Bharata and the intelligent Satrughna \ as we, 
O king, ask for thine own daughters in the interests of those- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




164 



RlMlYANA . 



high-souled ones (Rlma and Lakshmana). And these sons 
of Da^aratha are endeued with youth and beauty, resembling 
the LokapSlas, and possessed of the prowess of celestials. 
Therefore do thou, O foremost of sovereigns, by this alliance 
with both the brothers, bind the Ikshwaku race. And in this 
may thy mind never waver !” Hearing Vi^wSmitra's words 
embodying the sentiments of Vasishtha, Janaka with clasped 
hands addressed both the potent ascetics, saying, — “I con- 
sider my line as blessed ; since such puissant ascetics wish 
for such a desirable alliance. Whatever ye wish, even that 
shall be done, good betide ye. Let these daughters of Kuga- 
dhwaja together become the wives of Satrughna and Bharata. 
On the same day, O mighty Muni, let the four highly power- 
ful princes espouse the hands of the four princesses. The 
learned consider bridal celebrated on the day succeeding 
those on which the Phalgunis are on the ascendant, — and hav- 
ing for its presiding deity Bhaga — as the most auspicious." 
Having said these amiable words, king Janaka arose, and 
with clasped hands addressed both the foremost of ascetics, 
saying , — “l have reaped high religious merit (by these nup- 
tials^, and I also am your disciple. And do ye, ye anchorets, 
occupy these best of thrones, (belonging to us). And even 
as this kingdom is unto Da^aratha, is AyodhyS unto my- 
self. Do ye not therefore entertain any doubts as to your 
lordship. Do ye therefore do as it behoveth ye." And as 
Vaideha Janaka was speaking thus, Raghu’s son, king 
Da^aratha, well pleased answered that monarch, saying, 
— “Countless are the excellences that pertain to ye bro- 
thers, lords of Mithila ; and saints and sovereigns are 
ever honored by ye* auspiciousness be yours. Good be- 
tide ye, 1 will repair unto my own quarters, there to duly per- 



• The commentator here seems to be in fault. He explains, — “By yoo 
have your royal ancestors been honored.” Evidently an error. I differ frooi 
him. The particle cha (and) makes the point clear.— T. 



Digitized by CjOOQ le 




bAlakJndam. 



165 

form the Sraddha ceremonies/ 1 Then having greeted that 
king of men, the illustrious Da9aratha, placing those foremost 
of ascetics in his front, went away. And reaching his quarters, 
the king performed the SrSbldha according to the ordinance, 
arose the next morning, and completed Godana ceremony 
in consonance with the time. And to Brahmanas the monarch 
severally gave away kine by hundreds and by thousands, for 
the welfare of his sons. And that puissant one gave away 
unto the regenerate ones four hundred thousands of kine 
furnished with horns plated with gold, and each having her 
calf, — together with bell-metal vessels for milking them. And 
that descendant of Raghu addicted to his sons made presents 
of various other valuables unto the Brahmanas, on behalf of 
his sons. And having given away kine, the king surrounded 
by his sons looked like unto the amiable Prajapati* surround- 
ed by the Lokapalas. 



SECTION LXX II. 



^AlND it came to pass that the day on which the king 
made excellent presents of kine, the heroic Yudhajit, son 
unto the lord of the Kekayas and maternal uncle unto Bha- 
rata, presented himself before Da^aratha. And having 
seen the king and enquired after his welfare, he said unto 
him, — “The lord of the Kekayas hath from affection enquired 
after thy welfare, saying, — ‘They of whose peace thou 
art anxious, are at present well/ And, O foremost of 
kings, desirous of seeing my nephew (Bharata) that lord of 
earth repaired to Ayodhya, O descendant of Raghu. And 
learning at AyodhyS that thy sons for the purpose of marriage 
had, O monarch, come to Mithila with thyself, I have speedily 
hied hither, with the intention of seeing my sister’s son.” 

♦ The Bengal text — Like Prajdpati himself. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




1 66 



HAMlYANA , 



Then king Da 9 aratha, on having that dear guest with him, 
rendered unto him all the respect that he deserved. Then 
having passed the night in company with his high-souled 
sons, that one versed in men and things arose in the 
morning, and having disposed of his daily duties, approached 
the entrance of the sacrificial ground, headed by the saints. 
Then at an auspicious moment called Vijaya, RSma with 
Vasishtha as well as other Maharshis at his head, and 
accompanied by his brothers adorned with various ornaments, 
who had all performed the rites relative to their nuptials, 
(approached the entrance of the sacrificial ground). Then 
the worshipful Vasishtha, coming unto Vaideha, spake as 
follows, — “King Da9aratha, O foremost of sovereigns— that 
chief among the best of men — accompanied with his sons, 
who have performed all the rites relative to their nuptials, 
stayeth the orders of the bestower (of the bride) ; for the 
meeting of the giver and the receiver is indispensable to 
every transaction (of this nature). Do thou therefore main- 
tain thy merit by accomplishing this excellent nuptial 
ceremony.” Thus addressed by the high-souled Vasishtha, 
that exceedingly generous and energetic one versed in 
morality answered, saying, — “Who acts as my warder there ? 
And whose commands doth he stay ? And what need of 
exercising judgment in entering one’s own house ? As 
this kingdom is mine, so it is verily thine. O foremost of 
anchorets, my daughters resembling flames of fire, having 
performed all the rites relative to the inc lining nuptials, are 
at the foot of the dais ; and, sitting beside the dais 1 myself 
had been expecting thee every moment Do thou perform 
everything without let. What need of delaying further?" 
Hearing those words uttered by Janaka, Da 9 aratha entered 
in together with his sons and the body of saints. Then unto 
the king of the Videhas, Vasishtha spake as follows, — “O 
saint, do thou, O pious one, in company with the saints, 
perform, O master, the nuptial ceremonies of RSma charming 



Digitized by 



Google 




bXlakXndam. 



167 



unto all.” Thereupon, saying, — “So be it” unto Janaka, the 
worshipful saint Vasishtha of mighty austerities with VhjwS- 
mitra and the pious Sat&nanda in his front, constructed a dais 
agreeably to the scriptures, decking it out with fragrant 
flowers all around, and golden ladles, and variegated water- 
pots, and platters with ears of barley, and censers filled 
with Dkupa , and conchs, and sacrificial spoons, and vessels 
furnished with Arghyas , and those containing fried paddy, 
and sanctified Akshatas. And over the dais, Vasishtha with 
due mantras and rites spread an awning consisting of Dar - 
vas of equal proportions. And with prescribed rites and 
mantras placing fire upon the dais, the highly energetic one 
commenced upon offering oblations. Then bringing SitSL 
adorned with various ornaments near the fire, and placing* 
her before Raghava, king Janaka addressed the enhancer of 
Kau^alya's joy, saying, — “This Sit5, my daughter, do thou 
accept, good betide thee, as thy partner in the observance o£ 
every duty : do thou take her hand by thine. May she be of 
exalted piety, and devoted to her husband ; ever follow- 
ing thee like thy shadow !” saying this, the king sprinkled 
Rama's palm with water sanctified with mantras ; with the 
celestials and saints exclaiming, — “Excellent ! Excellent !” 
And the celestial kettle-drums sounded, and blossoms began 
to shower down copiously. Having thus given away his 
daughter SitSL, with water and mantras , king Janaka overflow 
ing with delight, said, — “Come forward, O Lakshmana, good 
unto thee. Receive thou Urmila ready to be bestowed by 
me upon thee. Do thou accept her hand: let there be no delay 
about it.” Having addressed Lakshmana thus, Janaka spake 
unto Bharata, saying, — “Do thou, O descendant of Raghu, 
take Mandavy&’s hand by thine own.” And the righteous 
lord of Mithila spake §lso unto Satrughna, saying, — “Do 
thou, O thou of mighty arms, take Srutakirti's hand by thine 
own. May ye all be good, and vowed unto excellent life ! 
and be, ye K&kutsthas, ye united with your wives. Let there 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




RlMlYANA. 



1 63 

be no delay about it/ 1 Hearing Janaka’s speech, those four 
perpetuators of Raghu’s line, staying by Vasishtha’s opinions, 
taking the hands of the four brides with their own, went 
round the sacrificial fire, and the dais, and the king, and the 
high-souled saints ; and in company with their wives, agree- 
ably to direction entered into matrimony in accordance with 
the ordinance. And there was a mighty shower of shining 
blossoms, from the firmament accompanied with the sounds 
of celestial kettle-drums, and choiring and instrumental 
music. And the Apsaras danced and the Gandharbas sang 
melodiously, at the bridal of the foremost of the Raghus. 
And this seemed wonderful to witness. And to the blowing 
of trumpets, those exceedingly puissant ones, thrice going 
round the fire, in company with their wives went to the 
encampment. And the king, having seen that all the auspicious 
ceremonies were performed, went in their wake, accompanied 
by the sages and his adherents. 



SECTION LX X I V. 



Then w'hen the night had passed away, the mighty 
Muni Vifw&mitra, having greeted the monarch, set out for 
the Northern mountains. And when Vi^wSmitra had gone 
away, king Dafaratha, greeting Mithila’s lord, Vaideha, ac- 
tively prepared for setting out for his own capital. And 
then the king of the Videhas gave a dower consisting of 
various things. And Mithil&’s lord gave many hundred 
thousands of kine, and excellent woolen stuffs, and Kotis of 
common cloths ; and elephants, and horses, and cars, and 
foot men, as well as an hundred damsels adorned, endow- 
ed with elegance, to form goodly waiting-maids. And well- 
pleased the king gave as a noble dower gold and silver 
and pearls and coral. And having given divers kinds of 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




BlLAKlNDAM. 



I69 



articles, that king, the lord of MithilS, bidding adieu to the 
monarch (Dagaratha), re-entered his own capital. And the 
master of AyodhyS accompanied with his high-souled sons, 
and headed by the saints in a body, started on the journey, 
followed by his army and attendants. And as that tiger-like 
one was on his way, in company with RSghava and the saints, 
the fowls began to utter frightful cries all around, and the 
beasts on earth to stream in a Southern direction. And behold- 
ing them, that tiger like monarch asked Vasishtha, saying, — 
•*Those birds of fierce aspects emit frightful cries and beasts 
stream in a Southerly direction. What is this ? My heart 
trembleth and my mind is not at ease.” Hearing the speech 
of king Da^aralha, that mighty saint spake sweetly, say- 
ing, “Hear what would be the result of it. These fowls of 
the air by their cries presage some dreadful impending evil ; 
but these beasts betoken peace restored. Therefore do thou 
renounce anxiety.” And as they were thus conversing, there 
blew a strong wind, shaking all the earth, and breaking down 
the trees. And a deep gloom enveloped the sun ; and no 
quarter could be discovered. And enveloped in ashes, that 
host became stupified. And at that dreadful hour, Vasishtha 
and the other saints and the king with his sons alone retained 
their senses, all else were deprived of their senses, and the 
army was enveloped with ashes. And the king saw that 
repressor of kings, the decendant of Bhrigu, Jamadagni's son, 
dreadful to behold, wearing a head of matted locks, irre- 
presible like unto KailS^a, and unbearable like unto the 
fire at the universal dissolution, flaming in energy, 
incapable of being looked at by the unrighteous, with his 
axe on his shoulder, equipped with a bow like unto the light- 
ning, and fierce arrows, looking like Siva the slayer of 
Tripura. And beholding him of dreadful appearance like 
unto flaming fire, the Vipras headed by Vi9 , vJlmitra, engaged 
in reciting mantras and offering oblations unto the fire,— 
those saints assembled together— began to converse with 
22 




Digitized by Google y'' 




RXmXI’ANA. 



*70 

' each other., saying, — "Is this one, enraged because oC the 
slaughter of his sire, intent upon exterminating the Ksha- 
triyas ? Formerly, having slaughtered the Kshatriyas, he 
pacified his ire and mental ferment, — therefore, to annihi- 
late the Kshatriyas once again can never be his endeavour.” 
Having said this, the saints offered Arghya unto Bhrigu's 
son of dreadful appearance ; and addressed him in soothing 
words, saying, — “O Rama ! O Rama.” Accepting that 
homage rendered unto him by the saints, that puissant one, 
jSmadagni’s son, R 5 ma, addressed R&ma, the son of 
Da^aratha. 



SECTION LXXV. 



V^/ Rama, son of Da9aratha, I have, O hero, heard of 
thy wonderful prowess ; and I have also heard all about thy 
breaking of the bow. And having heard of that wonderful 
and inconceivable breaking of the bow, I have bent my steps 
hither, taking another auspicious bow. Do thou 
stretch it, fix the arrow upon this mighty and dreadful bow, 
belonging to Jamadagni $ and thus display thy prowess. 
Then, having witnessed thy might in stretching the bow, I 
shall offer thee combat, laying under contribution our utmost 
strength.” Hearing his words, king Da9aratha with a blank 
countenance, and clasped hands, said, — "Thou hast quenched 
thy ire against the Kshatriyas; and, moreover, thou art a Br&h- 
mana boasting of high austerities. It therefore behoveth thee 
to dispel the fears of my sons who are boys. Thou bringest 
thy life from the race of the Bhargavas engaged in observing 
vows, and studying the Veda ; and thou hast renounced arms 
vowing in the presence of the thousand-eyed one. And 
embracing a life of righteousness, thou didst confer the 
earth upon K&9yapa ; and repaired to the forest, making the 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BiLAKiNDAM. 



17 * 

Mahendra hill thy home. O mighty Muni } thou hast come 
here to compass the destruction of my all ; but if Rama be 
slain, we shall never live.” Thus addressed by Da^aratha, 
the powerful son of Jamadagni, disregarding his words, thus 
addressed Rama, — “These two foremost of bows, extraordi- 
nary, and worshipped of all the worlds, and stout, and power- 
ful, surpassingly excellent, were constructed with care by 
Vi^wakarma. And, one of these, O foremost of men, for 
the destruction of Tripura, the celestials gave unto Tramvaka, 
desirous of encounter, — even that which, O Kikutstha, 
thou hast snapped. And this second, which is irrepressible, 
was given to Vishnu, by the chiefs of the celestials. And, 
O RSma, this bow belonging unto Vishnu, capable of conquer- 
ing hostile cities, is, O Kakutstha, equal in energy unto the 
bow belonging unto Rudra. Once on a time the deities, with 
the object of ascertaining the respective prowess of Vishnu 
and the blue-throated one, asked the great father, about it. 
Thereupon the great father, foremost of those abiding by truth 
— reading the intention of the deities, fomented a quarrel be- 
tween them. And upon that quarrel breaking out among the 
deities, there took place a mighty contest capable of making 
one's hair stand on end, between Vishnu and the blue-throated 
one, each burning to beat the other down. Then on Vishnu ut- 
tering a roar, Siva's bow of dreadful prowess became flaccid. 
And thereupon the three-eyed MahSdeva became moveless. 
And upon the assembled gods with the saints and the Charanas 
beseeching those two foremost of celestials, they became 
pacified. And upon beholding that bow of Siva rendered 
flaccid by Vishnu's prowess, the deities with the saints ac- 
knowledged Vishnu as the more powerful. And the enraged 
Rudra of high fame made over the bow along with its 
shafts unto the hands of the Rajarshi, Devarata of Videha. 
And, O Rama, this bow belonging to Vishnu, capable of con- 
quering hostile cities, Vishnu consigned to Bhrigu's son, 
Richika, as a worthy trust. And the exceedingly energetic 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




\7 1 



RAMXYANA, 



Richika made over the divine bow unto his son of immeasur~ 
able prowess, my sire the high-souled son of Jamadagni. 
And once on a time, on my sire surcharged with ascetic 
energy, renouncing the bow, Arjuna, under the influence of 
unrighteous sentiment, compassed the death of my father. 
Thereupon, learning of the lamentable and untoward slaugh- 
ter of my sire, I from ire, annihilated the Kshatriyas, spring- 
ing up afresh by numbers, then bringing under sway the 
whole earth, I, O Rama, on the sacrifice being over, confer- 
red it upon the righteous Ka^yapa as Dakshina . Having 
made this gift, I was dwelling in the Mahendra hill equipped 
with ascetic energy, when, hearing of thy snapping of the 
bow, I have speedily come hither. Do thou now, O Rama, 
agreeably to the cannon of the Kshatriya morality, take 
this excellent and mighty bow of Vishnu, that had belonged 
to my father and grand-father. And do thou set upon this 
best of bows an arrow capable of conquering hostile cities. 
And, O Kakutstha, if thou succeed, I shall then offer thee 
combat/' 



SECTION L XX V I . 



Hearing jSmadagni's words, the son of Da£aratha, 
in consideration of the presence of his father, said these 
words in subdued tone , — “O Bhrigu's son, I have heard 
of the deeds thou hast performed, resolved on avenging thy 
sire. O Br&hmana, I acknowledge that. But, O Bh&rgava, 
thou insultest me abiding by the Kshatriya duties, as pusil- 
lanimous or devoid of prowess. Do thou to-day witness my 
energy and vigor/' Saying this, the enraged RSghava, 
endowed with fleet vigor, took up Bhrigu's noble bow, to- 
gether with the shaft, from his hand. And; fixing the string 
upon it he set the arrow. And then RSma enraged addressed 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




bAlakAndam. 



m 



Jamadagni’s son, Rama, saying, — “Thou art a Brahmana and 
through VigwSmitra, art worthy of my homage. Therefore it is, 
O R&ma,that I cannot let go this life-destroying shaft. Which 
of these shall I reduce to aught, O Rama, — thy aerial 
course, or the merit thou hast attained through thy asce- 
ticism of ascending unto certain incomparable regions ? 
This celestial arrow sprung from Vishnu, capable of con- 
quering hostile towns, never hiteth fruitless, with energy 
destroying the pride of prowess of foes.” And with the 
object of beholding RSma holding that foremost of weapons, 
there assembled in a body the celestials and the saints, 
with the great father at their head. And the Gandharbas 
and the Apsaras and the Siddhas and the Charanas and the 
Kinnaras and the Yakshas and the Rakshasas and the Nagas 
assembled to behold that mighty wonder. And on Bhargava's 
energy having passed into R&ma bearing that best 
of bows, Jamadagni's son became bereft of prowess, 
and R§ma (Para9ur&ma) kept steadily eying R&ma. And 
rendered inert in consequence of his energy having been 
dispelled by Rama's own, Jamadagna mildly addressed R 5 ma 
of eyes like lotus petals, saying, — “When formerly I gave 
away the earth unto K§9yapas he said unto me, — ‘Thou 
must no longer stay in my dominions. And in consonance 
with the words of my spiritual guide, ever since that time I 
have never spent a night on earth. Even this had been 
promised by me, O Kakutstha. Therefore, O hero, it 
behoveth thee not to destroy my course, O descendant of 
Raghu. With the speed of the mind shall I now wend my 
way to the Mahendra, best of hills. And, O Rama, the 
regions I have conquered by my asceticism do thou destroy 
with that foremost of arrows : let there be no delay about it. 
Even from thy handling of this bow I know thee to be the 
chief of the celestials even that eternal one, the slayer of 
Madhu. Hail to thee, O vanquisher of foes j And all these 
celestials assembled are beholding thee, of unparalleled 



Digitized by 



Google 




1 74 



RAMAYANA. 



deeds, and without an antagonist in fight. — And, O Kakuts- 
tha, neither ought I to be ashamed (because of this discom- 
fiture) ; I have been baffled by the lord himself of the three 
worlds. And it behoveth, O RSlma to disengage this 
peerless shaft (from the bow), O thou — of noble vows ; and 
on thy shooting the shaft, I shall repair to that foremost 
of mountains, the Mahendra. When Jamadagni's son, RAma, 
had* said this, the puissant and graceful son of Da^aratha 
shot that, excellent arrow. And witnessing the destruction 
by Rama of his regions earned by his own austerities, 
Jamadaghi’s son speedily started for that best of mountains, 
the Mahendra. And then all the quarters became cleared of 
gloom ; and the celestials and saints fell to extol R5ma 
when he had shot the arrow. And that lord, Jamadagni’s son 
R&ma, having gone round RAma, the son of Da^aratha, and 
honored (by all), set out (for his own quarters). 



SECTION LX XVII. 



W HEN R5ma had departed, Da9aratha’s son the illus- 
trious Rama, of serene soul, made over the bow unto the 
hands of Varuna of immeasurable strength. Then saluting 
the saints headed by Vasishtha, Rama, the descendant of 
Raghu, seeing his father stupified, addressed him, saying,—* 
“Now that Jamadagni s son Rama hath gone away, let the 
four-fold forces maintained by thee as their lord, march in the 
direction of AyodhyA.” Hearing Rama’s words, king Da$a- 
ratha embraced his son with his arms, and smelt RSghava's 
crown ; and hearing that Rama had gone, the monarch became 
exceedingly delighted, — and considered himself and his son 
as having attained a second birth. And he urged on his army, 
and speedily arrived at the city, graced round with standards 
bearing pennons, and lovely to behold, and resounding with 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




BXLAKXNDAM . 



*75 



tbe sounds of trumpets, with its high-ways watered, and 
beauteous, and sprinkled around with flowers, crowded with 
citizens looking cheerful on account of the king's ap- 
proach, bearing auspicious articles in their hands, and beau- 
tified with the vast concourse of people. And received by 
the citizens as well as the regenerate ones inhabiting the 
city coming forward a long way, and followed by his 
graceful sons, the handsome Majesty of ilustrious name, en- 
tered his own dear residence, like unto the Him&vat. And 
entertained by his own relatives with all objects of enjoy- 
ment, the monarch rejoiced exceedingly. And Kau£alya and 
Sumitra and the slender waisted Kaikeyi, together with other 
wives of the king, were busy, receiving the brides, with the 
necessary ceremonies. And the royal spouses received the 
exalted SitSL and the famous Urmili and both the daughters 
of Ku^adhwaja, graced with silken apparel, with hornas 
performed and blessings invoked, on their behalf. And hav- 
ing paid reverence at the abodes of the gods, and rendered 
homage unto those that deserved the same, the daughters of 
the kings, well pleased, in private, took joy with their hus- 
bands. And having attained brides, and arms, with wealth 
and friends, those foremost of men, engaged in ministering 
onto their father. 

And once on a time that descendant of Raghu, king Da* 
taratha addressed Bharata, saying , — “O son, this son of the 
king of the Kekayas thy uncle, Yudhajit stayeth here, 
that hero, having come to take thee over.” And hearing 
these words of Da9aratha, Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, prepared 
for the journey, together with Satrughna. And having 
greeted his father, and R&ma of unflagging energy, and his 
mothers, that foremost of men, the heroic (Bharata) departed 
with Satrughna. And having Bharata as well as Satrughna, 
tbe heroic Yudhajit, with a delighted heart, entered his own 
city ; and his father rejoiced exceedingly. And on Bharata 
having departed, R&ma and the exceedingly mighty Laksh- 



Digitized by 



Googfe 




176 



rAmAyana. 



mana, tended their sire resembling a celestial. And paying 
the utmost regard to the command of his father, Rima dis- 
charged all the duties of the city, having for his object the 
pleasure or welfare (of the citizens). And heedfully rendering 
every service to his mothers, he on proper occasions observ- 
ed the duties pertaining to his superiors. And Da£aratha 
was exceedingly delighted ; as also the Brahmanas, and the 
traders, and the inhabitants generally, at the conduct and be- 
haviour of Rama. And Rama having truth for prowess, by 
virtue of his excellence appeared unto every one the most 
meritorious of (Da9aratha’s son’s) like unto the self create 
Himself unto all being. And in the company of Siti, the 
wise R§ma, bending his mind to SitSL, with his heart dedicated 
unto her, passed many a season in delight. And R&ma’s 
beloved Sita, as having been bestowed upon him by his sire, 
by her loveliness, and her perfections as much as by her 
loveliness, went on enhancing his joy. And her lord came 
to excercise a double influence on her heart. And by her 
own heart, the daughter of Janaka, Mitliil&'s lord, resembling 
a goddess in grace, and like unto Sree (goddess of wealth) 
herself in loveliness, completely read his inmost sentiments. 
And experiencing delight, Rama, receiving the Rijarshi's 
daughter, exercising her own will — the excellent princess — 
looked graceful, even like the lord Vishnu the chief of 
celestials on being joined with Sree. 




Digitized by LjOOQ le 




>L. II. 



« 



PARTS IV-I<. 



THE % 

ramayana! 



Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit op Valmiki. 

AYODHYA KANDAM. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 

MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A. 

Hector, Keshub Academy . 



\ 



PRINTED BY 

Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 

Diva Press, 65/a, Beadon Street. 

CALCUTTA. 



1891. 



| All rights reserved.] 



FOR THE COMPLETE BET IN ADVANCE. INCLUDING POSTAGt 
In India Rt. 16. In Elropr £ a. 



Digitized 



Google 





























• « . 



Digitized by 





« 

I 



JJtA. U- 

I 



\ • - ' 

THE 

RAMAYANA. 



Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 



AYODHYA KANDAM. 



I 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 

MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A. 

Rector , Keshub Academy . 



i 



PRINTED BY 

Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 

Dhva Press, 65/2, Beadon Street. 



CALCUTTA. 



189L 



f All rights reserved i \ 




Digitized by 



Google 



V a 

t ^A s- s 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




E AM A YANA. 



"%oLV -Vurr t 

V\ c VVef 
V II' 



AYODHTA KANDAM. 

SECTION I. 



W HEN Bharata set out for the home of his maternal 
uncle, he affectionately took with him the sinless Satrughna 
ever repressing his passions * And there he abode with his 
brother, being ministered unto in every respect and tended 
by his maternal uncle, Afwapati, with all the fondness of a 
father.f Albeit thus staying, with every ministration extended 
towards them as much as they could wish, yet those heroic 
brothers failed not to remember the aged king Da9aratha. 
And the puissant king also on his partx^membered his sons 
away from home, Bharata and Samighna, resembling the 
mighty Indra and Varuna. All those four chiefs of men were 
dear unto him even as four hands issuing from his own body. 
Yet among them all, the highly energetic R&ma was the 
favorite of his sire. He was the foremost of all in every 
virtue, like unto Sayambhu'sJ self in the esteem of creation. 
Solicited by the celestials wishing for the destruction of 
R&vana, he, who is the eternal Vishnu, was born as Rama 

* The adjectival epithet is nityasatrughnah . In rendering it I follow the 
commentator, who is presumably learned in the peculiar associations of the 
literature. But the literal meaning may do as well : ever vanquishing his 
foes. — T. 

f Lit. with the fondness shown to a son. — T. 

t BrahmA. — T. 

23 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





1 7 8 



RlMlYANA. 



in the world of men. And with that son of immeasurable 
energy, Kau^alya looked graceful, even as Aditi, with that 
foremost of the celestials, the weilder of the thunder-bolt. 
He was furnished with grace, and possessed of prowess ; and 
he did not seek for defects in others in the midst of virtues. 
That son of Kau^alya was incomparable on earth and in 
worth fully equal to Da^aratha himself. He was aye of 
quiescent soul ; and always preluded his speech with an 
amiable phrase ; and although he might be addressed 
in a harsh manner, yet he returned no corresponding 
reply. He was gratified even with a solitary instance of 
benefit; and from ‘freedom of soul did not remember an 
hundred injuries. In the intervals of martial exercises, he 
always discoursed with persons of character, or wise men, 
or the aged, or the virtuous. He was intelligent, and 
sweet-speeched, and spoke first ( to visitors, ) and used 
grateful words, and was possessed of prowesss, withal not 
proud of his mighty native virtue. He never spoke an un- 
truth ; and he was learned ; and he rendered homage unto 
the aged. He felt kindly towards the subjects ; and the 
subjects on their part held him in dear regard. He was kind 
to the poor ; and he had conquered his anger ; and he re- 
garded the Brahmanas ; and he commisserated the wretched ; 
and was versed in morality ; and always chastised the wicked; 
and was pure in spirit ; and possessed the thoughts and senti- 
ments of his race ; and regarded highly his own Kshatriya 
duties ; and considered that heaven was to be attained through 
the glory acquired by performing them. He was never engaged 
in forbidden practices ; and never relished improper talk ;and 
argued in chain even like the lord of speech himself. And he 
was free from ailment ; and of young years ; and endued with 
eloquence ; and of an excellent person ; and versed in sea- 
son and place ; and discerned character, — the one honest 
person ever created. Endowed with supreme excellence, 
that son of the monarch was by virtue of his Jmerit dear unto 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHTlKlNDAM . 



179 



the subjects like their life ranging externally. He bad 
performed his ablutions after having mastered all learning ; 
and was properly versed in the Vedas with their . branches. 
In all weapons either inspired with mantras or otherwise, 
Bharata’s eldest brother was superior £ven to his father. 
And he was the spring of all good ; and was saintly ; and of 
undisturbed souls ; and truth-telling; and candid; and humble 
towards the aged twice-born ones congnizant of virtue and 
interest. He was congnizant of virtue, profit, and interest ; 
had an excellent memory ; and was possessed of genius. He 
was an adept and was well versed in social usages and cus- 
toms. He was lowly ; and of close counsel ; and used to keep 
unto himself his purposes ; and was resourceful. Neither 
his pleasure nor his displeasure went for naught. He knew 
the season of amassing riches, and of giving them away. 
And he was ardently reverential ; and his wisdom never 
wavered ; and he accepted no improper present ; and he 
used no rough speech. He knew no idleness ; and was vigi- 
lant ; and had a knowledge of his own as well as of others’ 
failings. He was conversant with the scriptures ; and was 
grateful ; and could read the hearts of others. He had 
sagacity to perceive the seasons for duly showing favor 
or disfavor. He understood all about the reception of the 
righteous, the maintenance of family, and the occasion for 
chastising evil-doers ; and he was an expert in collecting 
dues (from the people) ; and knew the manner prescribed 
(by the authorities) for expending money. He had attained 
proficiency in all the scriptures and literary works 
composed in both Sanskrit and Prakrit. He sought 
pleasure without sacrificing either interest or morality ; 
and he was never dilatory in duty, He understood the 
arts of those who entertained others. He knew the vari- 
ous heads on which wealth was to be expended. He was 
skilful in riding and training up horses and elephants. 
He was the foremost of those accomplished in archery j 



Digitized by 



Google 




i8o 



RlMlYANA. 



and was acknowledged among men as an Atiratha .* He 
led his forces in the direction of the foe $ and he slew 
his enemies ; and was accomplished in marshalling the 
troops. He was incapable of being repressed in fight 
even by the enraged gods and Asuras. He was not given 
to carping, and had subdued his anger, and he was never 
elated, or malicious. He did not disregard any creature ; 
he was no slave to the times. That son of the monarch was 
furnished with such qualities. And he was liked by the sub- 
jects as well as by the three worlds. In forgiveness he was 
like unto the Earth ; and in intelligence like unto Vrihaspati ; 
and in prowess like unto the Sachi’s lord. Furnished 
with such qualities acceptable to the people as well as 
gratifying unto his father, Rama looked beautiful like the 
effulgent Sun surrounded by his rays. And the Earth desired 
for her lord even him(Rama)possessing an excellent character 
and of prowess incapable of being repressed — like unto 
Lokanatha + himself* 

And finding his son crowned with so many incomparable 
qualities, that subduer of his enemies, king Da9aratha, thought 
within himself. The long-lived aged monarch reflected, 
saying, — “How can RSma become king, I living j and how 
can this delight be mine ?” And this supreme desire rolled 
in his heart, — “When shall I behold my beloved son install- 
ed X in the kingdom ? Surely he always wisheth for the pros- 
perity of the people ; and he showeth kindness to all crea- 
tures. And like unto the showering rain-cloud, he is dearer 
unto the people than myself. He is like unto Yama and Sakra 
in prowess, and unto Vrihaspati in intelligence ; and in 
forbearance, unto a mountain, —yea, he is far more qualified 



* He who alone vanquishes an innumerable host of warriors is called an 
Atiratha. — T 

f Vishnu . — T 

X The Sanskrit abhishikta literally means sprinkled. But such a rendering 
would sound outlandish.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODH yXKlNDA M 



1 8 r 

than myself. Therefore in this age, beholding my son estab- 
lished in (the dominion of) this entire earth, I shall repair 
unto heaven.” Seeing him (Rlma) thus crowned with all 
these various as well as other sterling and immeasurable 
virtues rare among other princes, the king then took coun- 
sel with his ministers, and made up his mind to confer upon 
RSma the dignity of heir-apparent. And that intelligent 
(king) mentioned (unto his minister) the dreadful evils por- 
tended by appearances and phenomena in heaven and the 
air and on the earth ; and also pointed out the circumstance 
of decrepitude having taken possession of his person. He 
therefore gave them to understand that the installation of 
the high souled R&ma of countenance resembling the full 
moon would dispell his grief, at the same time that it would 
be universally hailed by the people. Therefore, influenced by 
his affection (for his subject,) and with the view of compass- 
ing his own as well as their welfare, the righteous monarch 
urged expedition (upon his counsellors ;) and that lord of 
earth brought together the prime and noble from the Various 
regions and countries of the earth. Like unto PrajSpati's 
self before all creatures, the king appeared before them, who 
had been received respectfully, and had, as befitted their 
ranks, various ornaments conferred upon and quarters as- 
signed unto them. But that lord of men did not, on account 
of haste, bring over either Janaka or the king of the Kekayas, 
concluding that a little while after they would receive the 
glad tidings. 

Then when the king — that captor of hostile capitals — had 
sat down there, began to pour in all the princes popular 
with their subjects — all save ( the two afore-mentioned 
rulers.) Facing and eying the monarch, those kings sat 
them down on different seats pointed out by the former. 
Surrounded by those prime and noble of the various 
provinces, and all those lowly rulers, who had been received 
honorably and who generally resided at AyodhyS, the so- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




182 



RlMlYANA. 



vereign appeared like unto the adorable thousand-eyed (one) 
surrounded by the immortals. 



SECTION II. 



Then facing his whole court, that lord of earth, the 
king, resounding all sides as if with thunder, in a mighty 
voice, echoing, and solemn, and like unto the sounds of a 
kettle-drum, spake words fraught with welfare, and capable of 
creating high rapture, and worthy of the attention of all. And in 
tones overflowing with royal signs; and mellifluous; and peer- 
less ; and surcharged with the sentiment of surprise, the mon- 
arch addressed the princes, saying, — “It is known to ye that 
the (people of this) spacious empire now governed by me was 
governed like unto children by those sovereigns that were my 
predecessors. Now it is my intention to bring welfare unto 
this entire earth worthy of being rendered happy, which 
had been governed by all those sovereigns, Ikshw&ku and 
the rest. Following the path trod by my predecessors, 
I have, heedless of my own happiness, to the best of my 
power, always protected the people. And under the shade of 
the white umbrella, I effecting the good of the entire commu- 
nity, have brought decrepitude upon my body. Having at- 
tained an age extending over many thousands of years, and 
lived for a long period, desire rest for this decrepit frame. 
Bearing in the interests of the people the heavy burden of duty 
incapable of being borne by even those that have controlled 
their senses, and requiring (in the bearer) right royal qualities, 

I have become fatigued. I therefore wish for rest, after in the 
interests of the subjects installing my son, with the permission 
of all these excellent twice-born ones around me. My worthy 
son, like unto Purandara himself in prowess — Rama, the con- 
querer of hostile cities, hath been born, endowed with all 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHYlKlNDAM . 



183 



my virtues. Him, like unto the moon while in conjunction with 
the Pushya constelletion — the foremost of those maintaining 
righteousness, the chief of men, will I, in the morning with a 
delighted heart, install as the heir-apparent to the throne. 
And that auspicious elder brother of Lakshmana* will make 
a fit ruler for ye, — yea, the very three worlds might con- 
sider themselves as having a lord, by possessing him. 
Through his agency I shall this day bring about the welfare 
of the world ; and shall renounce my toil by reposing in him 
the task of government. If what I have devised be meet, and 
also recommend itself to ye, do ye accord approval to it, — 
proposing what I am to do besides this, together with the 
how of effecting it. If I have thought thus solely because I 
find delight in it, do ye look about any other way to welfare. 
For different is the thought of the dispassionate $ and by fric- 
tion becomes far more efficacious.^f 

As the king had said this, the princes, exceedingly de- 
lighted, seconded him even as peacocks dance at sight of a 
mighty mass of clouds showering down rain. Then there 
arose a pleasant resonance (from the assembly of the potent- 
ates and next from the vast concourse inspired with high 
rapture arose an echo generated by their voices, which 
seemed to shake the earth. Then being in complete possess- 
ion of the views of that one (the king) versed in morality 
and interest, the Br&hmanas and the principal personages of 
the army, in company with the citizens and the inhabitants 
of the provinces, took counsel together, and became un- 
animous, — and, having again revolved the matter individually 
in their mind, spake unto the aged king Da9aratha, saying, — 
“O king, being many thousand years old, thou last become 

* There is an alliterative beauty here in the original Lakshmivdn Laksh - 
tnanagraja ; which of course is impossible to be retained in the translation. — T. 

f This is Mill’s principle of free and equal discussion so lucidly upheld in 
his Liberty. The meaning in the text is obscurely expressed. The thought of the 
d isspassionate is different from that of the passionate ; and truth comes out 
from the friction of the two opposite forces . — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





184 



RJlMIlYANA. 



aged. Do thou then install Rama as the heir-apparent to 
the throne. We wish to behold the exceedingly strong and 
mighty -armed hero among the Raghus, riding a huge ele- 
phant! his countenance underneath an umbrella.” Hearing 
those welcome words .of theirs, the monarch, as if not know- 
ing their minds, asked them, saying, — “Ye have wished for 
Raghava, soon as ye have heard my speech. This, ye kings, 
raiseth my doubts. Do ye, therefore, speak out your minds 
truly. Why, while I am righteously governing the earth, 
do ye wish to see the highly powerful Rama as the heir-ap- 
parent ?” And those high-souled ones together with the 
citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces said unto him, 
— “O king, many are the virtues of thy son, having for their 
object the welfare of the people. To-day we will recount 
unto thee in detail the merits making even enemies happy 
of the meritorious and intelligent (R5Lma) resembling a celes- 
tial. O monarch, furnished with the choicest qualities, R3ma 
having truth for prowess is like unto Sakri's self ; and he 
towereth above Ikshwaku and all. Rama is the one excellent 
person among men ; and is true and devoted to truth. And 
in very Rama is established morality with prosperity. Touch- 
ing the good of the subjects, he is like unto the moon, and 
in the quality of forgiveness, he is like unto the Earth ; in 
intelligence like unto Vrihaspati ; and in prowess like Sachi's 
lord. He is cognizant of duty, and true in promise, — 
and honest ; and not given to detraction. He is for- 
giving, and soothing, and sweet-speeched and grateful, 
and of subdued senses. He is pliable to entreaties and staid, 
and of agreeable carriage, and uncalumniating. R&ghava 
speaketh everyone fair, and is of truthful speech. He 
minstereth unto variously-versed aged Br&hmanas. It is 
for this that in this world his fame and renown and energy go 
on increasing. He hath mastered all the weapons that 
are extant among the gods, the Asuras, and human beings. 
He hath performed his ablutions after having acquired 



Digitized by 



Google 




AYODHYIkINDaM. 



i8 S 

learning ; and knoweth the Vedas with their branches. And 
Bharata’s elder brother is a proficient in music. He is 
the home of the good, and is saintly, and hath conquered his 
grief, and is magnanimous. He is lowly unto those twice 
born ones that are worthy and are conversant with morality 
and interest. And when in company with Sumitra’s son he 
wendeth to the fight with the view of protecting a city or a 
province, he cometh not back without conquering the foe. 
And even as a father enquireth after the welfare of his sons, 
he, returning from the field on horse or elephant, exhaustively 
and consecutively enquireth after the weal of the citizens, 
concerning their sons, or their (sacrificial) fire, or their 
wives, or their servants, or their disciples. And that tiger- 
like R5ma always asketh the BrShmanas, — ‘Do your disciples 
tend you* and the Kshatriyas — ‘Do your disciples always 
remain mailed ?* When calamity befalleth the people, he 
experienceth excess of sorrow ; and on their festal occasions, 
he rejoiceth ever like their own father. He speaketh 
the truth, and is a mighty bowman. He ministereth 

unto the aged, and hath controlled his senses. He. 
preludes his speech with a smile, and is established in right- 
eousness with his whole soul. He entirely bringeth about 
good, and he taketh no delight in bandying words after a 
quarrel. In reasoning in chain, he is like unto the lord 
of speech himself. His eye-browns are graceful ; and his 
eyes expansive and coppery ; and he is like unto the very 
Vishnu. Like KSma he is charming unto all by virtue of his 
heroism, prowess and might. He is ever engaged in 
protecting the people : and the desire for the good things 
of the world cannot perturb his mind. He is capable 
of bearing the burden even of the three w’orlds, — what then 
is this Earth ? Neither his pleasure nor his displeasure 
even goeth for nadght. He slayeth those that deserve 
to be slain ; but he is never enraged with those that 
ought not to be slain (/>. the uuoffending), — w'ith whom, 
*4 






Digitized by LjOOQle 




i86 



RlMlYANA. 



he is pleased, he bestows wealth upon. In virtue of his 
self-control and other qualities; dear unto the subjects and 
capable of exciting the delight of mankind, R&ma shineth 
even like the effulgent Sun surrounded by hrs rays. And 
eve\i that Rama, crowned with such qualities and having 
truth for his prowess, — like unto a Lokap&la, the Earth 
wisheth to have for her lord. By our good luck it is that thy 
son hath acquired competence in the task of administration ; 
and also by thy good luck it is thajt RSghava hath been 
born endowed with sonly qualities, liko unto MlLricha's 
son K&cyapa. The gods, and the Asuras, and men, with the 
Gandharvas, and the Uragas, and the inhabitants rural and 
Urban, pray for the strength, health, and long life of self- 
knowing Rama. And whether inmates or outsiders, citizens 
or natives of provinces, everyone speaks high of him. 
Women, old and young, in both the morning and evening, 
with intent minds, bow down unto all the gods on behalf 
of the intelligent RUma. Let their desire, O worshipful one, 
be fulfiled, through thy grace. And we would behold the son 
of the foremost of monarchs, the foe-destroying R&ma 
dark-blue like a lotus, — installed as the heir-apparent to the 
kingdom. Therefore, O bestower of boons, it behoveth thee, 
for the sake of our well-being, with a delighted mind to 
speedily instal thy son furnished with noble qualities resembl- 
ing the god of gods, and ever intent upon the welfare of the 
entire community/' 



SECTION III. 

A.ND when they had raised unto their heads their clasped 
hands resembling lotuses, the king responding unto them 
addressed them in welcome words fraught wkh their good ; 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODMYlKlNDAM. 



187 



“Exceedingly plea$pd am I, and incomparable also is my 
influence; — because ye wish to behold my dear first born 
installed as heir-apparent.” Having greeted them thus, the 
king in their hearing Spoke unto Vasishtha, Vamadeva, and 
other BrShmanas saying, — “This is the holy month 
of Chaitra ; and the groves look beautiful with blossoms. Do 
ye now prepare for the installation of Rama.” When the 
king paused, there arose a mighty tumult from the 
multitude. And when it subsided, that lord of men, the 
king, addressed that foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha 

saying,— “ It behovcth thee, O worshipful Sir, to order 
for things, necessary for the installation of Rama.” 
Hearing those words of the monarch, Vasishtha — chief of 
anchorets — ordered the counsellors staying before the king 
with clasped hands, saying, — “Do ye early in the morning in 
the Agnihautric hall of the monarch provide and store up. 
gold, and gems, and articles for warship, and Sarvaushadhi* 
and white garlands, and fried paddy, and honey and clarified 
butter in separate vessels, and cloths fresh from the 

loom, and a car, every kind of weapons, and the fourfold 
forces, and an elephant with auspicious marks, and a 
couple of chowris, and a sceptre and an umbrella, pale 
colored, and an hundred furnished golden pitchers of water, 
and a bull with horns plated in gold, and an entire 
tiger-skin, together with all other necessary articles. And 
do ye embellish all the door-ways of the inner apartment as 
well as those of the entire city with garlands, with sandal 
paste and fragrant Dhupa . Do ye on the morning 
of the morrow bestow upoft the principal Brahmanas 
goodly and refined rice mixed with curds and milk. — so that 
hundreds of thousands may be fed, and gratified, bestowing 
on them at the same time clarified butter and curds, and 
fried paddy, and mote than sufficient Dakshinas. To-morrow 



* Consists of Uurd Valerian and such like drugs.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





rXmXvana . 



1 88 

as soon as the sun will rise, the Swastivachana* will be 
finished. Do ye invite the Brahmanas, and prepare seats 
(for them). And do ye set up flags, and water the high ways, 
and let courtezans whose profession is music, adorning 
themselves stay in the second apartment of the king's 
residence. In the abodes of the gods and under the 
Chaityat trees, should be separately placed fragrant blossoms, 
together with boiled rice and other edibles, and with 
Dakshinas. And let the warriors properly arrayed, enter the 
courtyard of the monarch which is welling up with festal glee- 
mailed; and accoutred with leather fences and long swords." 
Having issued these orders, those two Vipras entered upon 
their work (as priests;) and did what remained to be done 
after making that known unto the lord of the earth. When 
everything had been got ready those foremost of the twice- 
born ones gladly and well-pleased presented themselves 
before the master of the earth, and said unto him, “Every- 
thing as ordered has been done.” Then unto Sumantra, the 
effulgent monarch spake, saying, — “Do thou speedily bring 
the virtuous Rama hither.” Thereupon saying, “so be it/ 1 
Sumantra at the mandate of the king brought thither in a 
car Rama the foremost of car-warriors. The kings of the 
North, and the South and the East and the West, together 
with the Mlechas and the Arya princes, with those 
inhabiting mountains and forests were then paying 
homage unto him (Da9aratha) even as the celestials do 
unto VSLsava. Stationed in his palace, the royal saint 
Da^aratha in the midst of those princes, like Visava in the 
midst of the Maruts, saw his son, resembling the king of the 
Gandharvas, approach, gladdening the subjects like a shower, 
when they were oppressed with the heat of summer— even 

* A religious rite, preparatory to any important ceremony, in which the 
Brahmanas strew boiled rice on the ground, and invoke the blessings of the 
gods on the rites about to commence. — 7, 

t The religious fig.-rT. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




a vqdhyAkAndam. 



189 

R&ma of redoubtable prowess among men, long armed, and 
of mighty strength, and bearing the gait of a mad elephant, 
with a countenance fair as the moon, of presence prepossess- 
ing to a degree, and captivating men’s sight and hearts by 
reason of his beauty generosity and other qualities. And as 
he was approaching, the lord of men eyed him steadily, 
without experiencing satiety. 

Making RSghava descend from that excellent car, 
Sumantra followed him with clasped hands as he proceeded 
to the presence of his father. Accompanied with Sumantra, 
Raghava, the descendant of the Raghus, for the purpose of 
beholding the monarch, began with rapid steps, to ascend 
the palace resembling a peak of the Kailasa hill. Rama 
humbly approaching his father with clasped hands, and 
announcing his name bowed low and worshipped his father’s 
feet. Thereupon seeing R§ma at his side with clasped hands, 
and in lowly guise, the king took hold of Rama’s clasped 
hands, and drawing his beloved son, embraced the latter. 
Then the king desired Rama to sit upon a seat prepared 
expressly for him, excellent, and flaming and garnished 
with gold and gems. RSghava shed lustre on that noble seat, 
as the unclouded sun at his rising lighteth up the Sumeru 
hill with his rays. That entire assembly looked beautiful 
in his presence, like the cloudless, autumnal sky crested 
with stars and planets, in the presence of the moon. The 
king experienced delight, beholding his dearly beloved 
son, like unto his own image, richly adorned, reflected on 
mirror. And even as Ka9yapa addresseth Indra of the 
celestials, the king — the best of those possessing sons — 
addressed his son, well seated, in these words, saying. “Born 
of my eldest wife worthy of myself, thou crowned with the 
best qualities, art my worthy son, O R&ma dear unto me. 
Thou hast by thy virtues drawn unto thyself the hearts 
of the people, therefore do thou during the conjunction of 
the moon with the PushySl constellation, receive the office 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




190 



RAmAYANA. 



of heir-apparent. Thou art by nature crowned with virtues. 
Notwithstanding thy great virtues, I will,0 son, from affection 
tell thee what is for thy profit. Practicing greater humility, 
do thou constantly restrain thy senses. Do thou renounce the 
ills that come through anger and lust. Replenishing thy 
exchequer and arsenal do thou, acquainting thyself with the 
state of things personally and otherwise, administer justice 
and thereby enlist the affection of the courtiers and other 
subjects; for the friends of him that swayeth the earth, 
pleasing the people to his satisfaction, rejoice even as did 
the immortals on obtaining ambrosia. Therefore, do thou, 
O son, disciplining thyself thus address thee to thy task.” 
Hearing this, Rama’s well wishers, ever doing his pleasure, 
speedily going out, acquainted Kau 9 alya with everything. 
Thereupon that foremost of her sex Kau9a1ya ordered gold 
and kine and various kinds of gems to be given to the tellers 
of the glad tidings. Then Raghava, having been honored by 
the multitude and saluted the sovereign, ascended a car, 
and repaired unto his shining residence. And the citizens, 
hearing those words of the monarch, as if fraught with some 
speedy good fortune unto them, made their obeisance unto 
that lord of men, and repairing to their homes, with delighted 
minds, worshipped the gods. 



SECTION IV. 



W HEN the citizens had gone away, the king versed in 
the time and place of ceremonies, after deliberating with his 
counsellors fixed the time (of the installation.) And his con- 
clusion was even this -.“To-morrow the PushylL will be in ; and 
to-morrow should my son, Rama of eyes like lotus-leaves be 
installed as heir-apparent.” Then entering the inner apart- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHYAKlNDAM . 



19! 

mcnt king Da^aratha said unto the charioteer Sumantra,— 
“Do thou again bring R«Lma hither.” In response to those 
words, the charioteer agaiu speedily went unto R&ma’s 
residence.for bringing him thither. His fresh approach having 
been announced unto R&n&a by the warders, the latter, filled 
with apprehension, became anxious. And bringing Sumantra 
in, Rama with eagerness said ‘‘Tell me fully the reason of 
this thy fresh visit.” Thereupon, the charioteer told him, — 
"The sovereign wisheth to behold thee. Thou hast known 
the occasion ; and now decide whether thou wilt go thither 
or not.” Hearing the charioteer’s speech, Rama also in 
baste repaired unto the king's palace, with the view of 
again beholding the lord of men. And on hearing of Rama's 
arrival, king Da9aratha made him enter his own chamber, 
with the view of communicating unto him something 
exceedingly agreeable. And immediately on entering 
his father's residence, the graceful Raghava seeing his father 
from a distance, bent low with clasped hands. Thereupon 
raising Rama as he was bending down, and embracing him, 
and pointing out a seat, the protector of the earth again 
spake unto him, — “O Rama, enjoying at my will the good 
things of life, 1 have grown old ; and have attained great 
age. I have worshipped the deities by celebrating hundreds 
of sacrifices with numerous Dakshinas and gifts of boiled 
rice; and incomparable on earth, thou hast been born 
unto me for a son after my heart. 1 have given whatever 
had been wanted (by others) ; I have finished my studies, 

0 foremost of men. 1 have, O hero, acted and enjoyed. 

1 have been emancipated from my obligations unto the 
celestials and saints, and the Pitris % and the Vipras, and 
myself.* And naught now remaineth to be done by me 
save thy installation. Therefore it behoveth thee to do even 



• Sacrifice, study, son, gift, enjoyment are the five means of clearing 
the debts one owes to the celestials, the saints the pitris, the vipras 
and self.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





192 



RAmAFANA. 



what I say unto thee. To-day the subjects in a body have 
expressed their desire of having thee for their sovereign. 
Therefore, O son, I shall install thee as the heir-apparent. 
O Raghava, to-night I have dreamt inauspicious dreams. 
Stars with tremendous sounds, shoot by day, accompanied 
with thunder-claps. The astrologers say that the star of my 
life hath been invaded by those terrible planets, the Sun, 
Mars, and Rahu. It generally happens that when such 
signs manifest themselves, the king cometh by a terrible 
calamity, and may meet with death itself. Therefore, O 
Raghava, my thoughts change, be thou installed (in the 
kingdom), for fickle is the mind of all creatures. To-day, 
before meeting Pushya, the moon has entered the Punarvasu 
asterism ; and the astrologers say that to-morrow it will 
certainly be in conjunction with PushyS. My heart 
urgeth me to instal thee during the PushyS conjunction, so 
Oh ! afflicter of foes, I shall instal thee to-morrow as heir- 
apparent. Therefore do thou along with my daughter-in-law 
commencing from sun-set, serving the prescribed restric- 
tions, and lying down on a bed of Ku£a grass, spend 
the night in fast. And let thy friends vigilantly protect 
thee all around, for many are the impediments that happen 
in affairs like this. In my opinion, during the interval 
that Bharata is away from the city, should thy installation 
be effected most opportunely $ even though thy brother 
Bharata ever stayeth entirely by the course of the honest ; 
he followeth his elder brother ; and is righteous-souled $ 
tender-hearted ; and of subdued senses. But in my opinion, 
the hearts of men are inconstant, — and, O Raghava, the hearts 
even of the virtuous change by the action of the natural 
impulses.” Having been thus addressed in the matter of his 
coming installation in the next day, Rama, with the king’s 
permission embodied in "Go thou,” greeting his father, 
repaired unto his quarters. And entering his residence in 
the interests of the installation ordered by the monarch, he 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHVAKJlNDAM . 



193 



immediately issued out, and went to the inner apartment of 
his mo.ther. There, R2Lma found his mother in the temple, 
clad in silk, adoring the gods, and silently praying for his 
royal luck. There, hearing of the welcome installation of 
Rama, h^d already come Sumitra, and Lakshmana and Sita 
summoned (by Kau^alyS). Hearing of the installation of his 
son in the office of heir apparent during the influence 
of the Pushya, at that time, tended by Sumitra and 
Sita and Lakshmana, there stood KaugalycL, meditating 
the (triune) person Janarddana, through suspension of 
breath. Rama, approaching and saluting her engaged in 
auspicious observance, addressed her in excellent words, 
cheering her up, — “O mother, by my father have I 
been appointed to the task of governing the people. And, 
agreeably to the desire of my father, to morrow will 
take place my installation. To-night Sita will fast 

along with me. The priests have said thus ; and this 
also hath been declared by my father. Do thou therefore 
even to-day provide those necessary auspicious things that 
will be required for myself and Vaidehi on the occasion of 
the coming installation.” 

Hearing of that for which she had ever wished, Kaugalya, 
her voice choking with the vapour begot of delight, addressed 
Rama, saying, — “Rama, my child, be thou long lived ; and 
may thy enemies find destruction ! Furnished with this 
good fortune, do thou gladden Sumitra’s as well as my own 
relatives. Oh ! thou vvast born under an auspicious star : 
thou hast. O son, by thy virtues gratified thy sire Dasaratha. 
Ah ! not unfruitful has proved my disinterested observance of 
vow unto the lotus-eyed Person ; foT this royal fortune of 
the Ikshwaku race shall rest upon thee.’* 

Having been thus addressed by his mother, Rama looking 
at his brother (Lakshmana), seated in humble guise with 
clasped hands, with smile spake unto him, saying, — “O 
Lakshmana, do thou together with me rule this earth. Thou 

25 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




194 



RlMlFANA. 



art my second self ; and this good fortune hath tak£h posses- 
sion of thee (as well). Do thou, O Sumitra’s son, enjoy 
every desirable thing and the privileges pertaining to royal- 
ty. My life and this kingdom I covet for thy sake alone.” 
Having said this unto Lakshmana, and paid reverence unto 
his mother, Rama with their permission went with Sita to 
his own quarters. 



SECTION V. 



Having given his directions unto Rama as to his in- 
coming installation on the morrow, the king, summoning his 
priest, Yasishtha spake unto him, saying, — * 0 thou, having 
asceticism for thy wealth, go, unto Kakutstha, and for his 
welfare and obtaining the kingdom, make him fast along with 
my daughter-in-law.” Thereupon, saying, “So be it,” that 
best of those versed in the Veda, the worshipful Vasistha 
conversant with mantras % that one practicing excellent 
vows, mounting a Brahma car, himself went unto the resi- 
dence of Rama cognizant of mantras , for the purpose of 
making him fast. And that foremost of ascetics, having 
reached Rama’s sable hued residence resembling a mass of 
clouds, passed through three several apartments, mounted 
on the car. With the view of honoring the saint worthy 
of honor, Rama swiftly issued out of his abode. And 
nearing the car of that intelligent one, Rama, personally 
taking him by the hand, made him descend. Finding Rama 
so humble and dear, the priest addressed him, gratifying and 
delighting him with words that were acceptable, — “O Rama 
thy father hath been well pleased with thee ; since thou 
achievest the kingdom (through him). Do thou to-day fast 
with Sita. And in the morning, the king, thy father 
Dasaratha, will, well-pleased install thee as heir-apparent 



Digitized by 



Google 




A TODH yAkXnda m 



195 



like Nahusha installing Yayati." Having said this, that 
pure spirited one, observing vows with mantras , made 
RSLma fast along with Sita. Then having been duly worship- 
ped by Rama, and taken Kakutstha’s permission, 
the spiritual preceptor erf the king, went away from 
Rama’s residence. Rama, having passed sometime 
with sweet-speeched friends, and been honored by them, 
with their permission entered his apartment. At that 
time Rama’s residence was filled with joyous men and 
women ; and it was like unto a lake containing lotuses and 
graced with nvaddened birds. 

( On the other hand ) Vasishtha, issuing from the 
palace of Rama like unto the king's palace itself, found 
the street filled with people. On all sides, Ayodhya's 
high-ways were crowded with groups of men full of 
curiosity. The tumult that arose in the high-ways 
in consequence of the concourse and noise, was like 
the roaring of the ocean. The streets were cleared and 
washed and hung with garlands ; and that day Ayodhya 
had her dwellings furnished with upraised flagstaffs. In 
the city of Ayodhya. men with women and children eagerly 
expected the rising of the sun (next day), and Rama’s ins- 
tallation ; and the people burnt to behold in Ayodhya the 
august festivity, that was like unto an ornament unto the 
subjects, and that enhanced the joy of the people. Divid- 
ing the crowd thronging the high-way, the priest slowly 
proceeded to the royal family. And ascending the palace 
like unto a peak of the Himavat, he met with the lord of men, 
like Vrihaspati meeting with Sakra. Seeing him come, 
the king rising up from his royal seat, asked Vasishtha 
whether his intention had been carried out, whereupon 
Vasishtha answered that it had. The courtiers who had all 
along sat with Da^aratha, rose from the seats, for worship- 
ping the priest. Then with the permission of his spiritual 
guide, leaving that assembly of men, the monarch entered 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




196 



RlmlVANA. 



his inner apartment like a lion entering his den. Even 
as the moon illumineth the firmament crowded with stars, the 
handsome king entered his mansion, like unto the abode of 
the mighty Indra, and thronged with females excellently at- 
tired, — gracing it (by his presence). 



SECTION VI. 



a Q “I 

W HEN the priest had gone away, R&ma, having 
bathed and with a collected mind, began to adore Nara- 
yana, in company with his wife having expansive eyes. Then 
raising the vessel of clarified butter unto his head (by way 
of paying reverence), he in accordance with the ordinance 
began to offer oblations unto the flaming fire on behalf of 
that mighty deity. Then, having partaken of the remaining 
quantity of the clarified butter, Rama prayed for his own 
welfare, and meditated on the god Narayana. The son of the 
best of men with a collected mind, and restraining his speech 
lay down on a kufa bed together with Vaidehi within the 
graceful dwelling of Vishnu. 

When a single watch only remained of the night, 
Rama awoke, and made his residence well decorated. 
Now he hearing the melodious utterances of genealo- 
gists and panegyrists and Brahmanas versed in the Puranas , 
R&ma finished devotions for the prior twilight, and 
with an intent mind began to recite ( Sdvatri /* And 
clad in a clear silk dress , he with bended head hymned 
the destroyer of Madhu, and made the regenerate ones 
perform the Swastivdchana ceremony. Already resounding 
with the blares of trumpets, AyodliySl became filled with 

* The celebrated hymn to the sun, the most sacred thing *in all the 
Vedas.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYlKlNDAM. 



1 97 



the sweet and solemn tones of the expression “Holy day” 
uttered by them. The denizens of Ayodhya, hearing that 
Raghava had fasted with Vaidehi, rejoiced exceedingly. 

Then the citizens, hearing of the installation of Rama, 
and seeing that the night had departed, fell to adorning the 
city. Standards with pennons were beautifully reared up 
in the abodes of the gods resembling a peak, enveloped 
with white clouds, and at the crossing, and on high-ways ; 
and over the chaitya tree ; and edifices ; and over the ware- 
houses of merchants abounding in goods and the goodly 
and prosperous mansions of householders \ and over all the 
council-houses ; and conspicuous trees. The multitude 
then heard the music, soothing unto the ear and heart, of 
stage managers, dancers and singers chanting. The people 
began to talk with each other anent the installation of 
Rama ; and the time for his installation having arrived, on 
terraces and houses, and doorways boys playing in bodies, 
conversed with each other concerning the installation of 
Rama. On the occasion of the investiture of Rama, the 
goodly high-ways were adorned with garlands,and scented with 
dhupa incense — by the citizens. And fearing lest R&ma should 
come out over night (to behold the beautified capital), the 
inhabitants of the city, by way of ornamentation as with the 
view of beholding Rama himself, had by the road side reared 
up lamp-stands in the form of (branched) trees. Eagerly 
expecting the investiture of R&ma as the heir apparent, 
all having thus ornamented the city and assembling them- 
selves on terraces and in council-halls, talking with 
each other, extolled the lord of men, saying, — “Ah 
high-souled is this king — the perpetuator of the Ikshwaku 
race j for, knowing himself as old, he will install Rama in 
the kingdom. Obliged we have been, since good Rama 
capable of reading character, will be the lord of earth, and 
our protector. He is of a heart devoid of arrogance, and 
is learned j and righteous-souled ; and affectionate to his 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




198 



RA3JAYA N A, 



brothers. R&ghava loveth us even as he doth his own 
brothers. May the sinless and pious king Dasaratha live 
long ; for it is through his grace that we shall behold R&ma 
installed.” The inhabitants of the provinces, who having 
heard the tidings, had come from various regions, heard the 
citizens conversing thus. Desirous of beholding the installa- 
tion of RSma, they coming into the city from var’ous 
directions, filled Rama's city. As the vast concourse 
entered (the city), there was heard an uproar like unto 
the roaring of the heaving ocean during the fullness of 
the moon. Then that city resembling the regions 
of Indra, being filled on all sides with tumult raised 
by the dwellers of the provinces who had come to behold 
(the installation), resembled the ocean when its waters are 
agitated by the aquatic animals inhabiting it. 



SECTIO N! VII . 

: 00 : 

A. WOMAN, brought up with Kaikeyi, who formerly served 
as a maid-servant, the family of her maternal uncle, at her 
own will, ascended the palace resembling the moon. 
Manthara beheld from the'palace the high-ways of AyodhyJL 
well watered all round, and strewn with lotuses, and adorned 
with standards bearing gay pennons ; with thoroughfares and 
roads leading along undulating lands ; sprinkled with sandal 
water, and crowded with men who had performed their ablu 
tions ; and echoing with the accents of regenerate ones 
bearing garlands and sweetmeats in their hands ; and having 
the doorways of the temples painted white ; and resounding 
with the sounds of musical instruments ; and filled with 
many folks ; and singing with Veda chantings ; and with 
its horses and elephants delighted, and cows and bulls emit- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHYIKXN'DaM . 



199 



ting roars ; and with standards displaying flags erected 
by the exhilarated citizens. Upon seeing AyodhySL (in such 
excitement) Manthara was seized with exceeding surprise, 
Manthar&, seeing a nurse hard by clad in white silk, with 
her eyes expanded with delight, asked her, saying, — “What 
for R£ma’s mother although close-fisted, is cheerfully and 
with the greatest possible alacrity dispensing wealth unto the 
people ? And what for is the general overflow of joy ? And 
what doth the delighted monarch purpose to do ?" There- 
upon bursting with very great delight, the nurse communicat- 
ed unto the hump-backed woman the high fortune awaiting 
R£ma, saying, — “To-morrow under PushyS, king Da^aratha 
will install the sinless Raghava having his anger under 
control, as heir-apparent to the throne.” Hearing the words 
of the nurse, the hump-backed one, speedily growing 
angry, descended from the edifice resembling a summit 
of the Kailua hill. Burning in ire, the sin-seeking 
Manthara addressed Kaikeyi, lying down, saying, — “Up, 
ye senseless one t What for art thou down \ A great 
danger approacheth thee. Thou understandeth not that a 
mighty grief overfloweth thee. Thou boastest of good for- 
tune while misfortune is thine in the shape of luck. Thy 
good fortune is surely unstable like the tide of a river during 
summer. Thus addressed by the sin-seeking hump-backed 
(hag) in exceedingly harsh language, Kaikeyi became afflicted 
with great grief. Atid Kaikeyi said unto the humpbacked 
one, — “Is any evil present, O Manthari ? I do not find thee 
with countenance fallen and sore distressed with grief.” The 
hump-backed Manthara, skilled in speech, who really sought 
Kaikeyi' s welfare, hearing the latter's sweet-accented words, 
displaying sorrow greater than Kaikeyi’s own, lamenting, 
and enlisting Kaikeyi's feelings against R&ma, uttered words 
inflamed with anger, saying, — “O worshipful one, an en- 
during and terrible destruction is imminent unto thee. King 
Da^aratha will install Rama as heir-apparent. I have been 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




2 CO 



RXmJlYANA . 



sunk in a fathomless fear ; and am afflicted with grief and 
heaviness. And as if burning in fire I, seeking, thy wel- 
fare, have come unto thee. For, O Kaikeyi, great waxeth my 
grief on witnessing thy sorrow ; and my advancement 
progresseth along with thine. There is no doubt about 
this. Born in a race of king thou art the queen of this 
lord of earth. Why dost not thou then realise the 
sternness of royal morality. Thy maintainer speaketh 
most morally ; but is crafty for all that : he speaketh 
blandly, but hath a crooked heart. Him thou takest as of 
blessed condition ; and therefore art gulled. Speaking 
unto thee soft words bare of substance, he will, his heart on 
the alert, to-day compass the welfare of Kauyalya. Having 
sent Bharata unto the home of thy relatives, that wicked- 
minded one will establish Rama in his ancestral kingdom 
rid of its thorn. Thou, O girl, in consideration of thy welfare, 
hast like unto a mother taken unto thy lap a venomous snake 
in the form of thy husband. Even what is done by an 
enemy or a serpent left alone, is being done by Da^aratha 
of wicked ways and false soothing speech, unto thee and 
thy own son. And, O girl, deserving as thou art of happi- 
ness, the king having established RSma in the kingdom ; 
thou wilt be annihilated along with thy own. The time hath 
come, O Kaikayi, — do thou on the spur enter upon that which 
would turn to thy advantage. And, O thou, influenced by 
surprise, do thou deliver thyself, me and Bharata also.” 

Hearing Manthara’s words, that one of graceful counte- 
nance filled with delight, and looking like the autumnal 
moon-light, rose up from her bed. Inspired with ex- 
ceeding joy, Kaikeyi, struck with surprise, made unto the 
hump-backed woman a present of an excellent and elegant 
ornament. And having given her the ornament, that paragon 
among the fair Kaikeyi joyfully, addressed Manthara, 
saying, — “O Manthara J highly welcome is the news that 
thou hast communicated unto me. And surely thou hast tpld 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A VODHYlKlNDA M. 



201 



me what is dear unto my heart, what shall I do for thee ? 
Difference find I none between Rama and Bharata. Therefore 
delighted am I that the king purposeth installing R5ma in 
the kingdom. There is no other ambrosial speech that is 
excellent and acceptable unto me, compared with the installa- 
tion of Rama. Therefore do thou ask of me whatever reward 
dost thou want and I shall give thee.’ 1 



SECTION VIII. 



JManthara, making Kaikeyi the object of her wrath, 
threw off the noble ornament, and spoke these words, in anger 
and grief, — “Thou senseless girl, wherefore dost thou display 
thy joy on such an unfit occasion. Thou dost not see that 
thou art in the bosom of an ocean of grief. Being grieved 
at heart do I laugh at thee inwardly, O worshipful lady, 
because thou having met with signal calamity, rejoicest even 
in what should be lamented. I lament thee for thy perversion 
of sense. What sensible woman can rejoice in the advance- 
ment of a cp-wife’s son, like unto death itself ? From Bharata 
proceeds Rama's fear concerning the kingdom to which both 
have an equal claim. Thinking of this, I am pressed down 
with sorrow, because fear proceeds from the person who fears 
much. The mighty armed Lakshmana hath for certain in 
all ways taken refuge in Rama; and Satrughna like unto 
Lakshmana hath taken refuge in the Kakutstha, Bharata. With 
reference to gradation of birth, the probability is in favor of 
Bharata* s attempting the kingdom ; yet by reason (of Rama’s 
being the elder) of the two, Bharata hath been thrown off. 
Anticipating the peril that might spring unto thy son from 
Rama, learned and versed in the functions of the Kshatriya, 
and of quick decision, I tremble. Surely Kau£alya is of blessed 
fortune, for to-morrow under Pushya the foremost of the twice- 

26 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




202 



rAmAyana. 



born ones will instal her son as the mighty heir-apparent 
unto the empire. Thou wilt, with clasped hands, serve as 
a slave the illustrious Kau^alya, mistress of the world, and 
brimming over with joy, with all her foes discomfitted. Thus 
along with us thou wilt attend her commands, and thy son 
also will await the pleasure of Rama. And Rama's wives* 
’together with their hand-maids will be filled with delight ; 
and in consequence of Bharata's name, thy daughters-in-law 
will be afflicted with sorrow.” 

Seeing Manthara dead set against R&ma, and speaking 
in this wise, the noble Kaikeyi praised the virtues of Rlma. 
“RSma is cognizant of morality, and filled with perfections, 
and accomplished, and grateful, and endowed with truth, and 
pure. And as he is the eldest son of the king, he deserveth 
the kingdom as heir-apparent. That long-lived one shall 
maintain his brothers and his retainers even like a father. 
Why then, O hump-backed one, do thou grieve, hearing 
Rima's installation. And for certain, that foremost 
of men, Bharata also, an hundred years after Rama, 
will attain the kingdom bequeathed by ^his father and 
grand-father. O Manthara, thou burnest (with grief) in 
this auspicious time. Our good fortune will come (after 
this in the shape of Bharata's installation); why then dost thou 
grieve. Surely Rama is dearer unto me than Bharata ; and he 
' also lovelh me more than he doth Kau9alya. And if the king- 
dom be Rama's it will be also Bharata's at the same time. 
Rama regardeth his brothers even as his own self.” 

Hearing Kaikeyi's words, Manthara exceedingly aggrieved, 
sighing hot and hard, thus addressed Kaikeyi, saying,— 
“Regarding that to be evil which is thy good, thou dost not 
through thy want of understanding know that thou art going 
to be drowned in a sea of grief and peril. Raghava will 
become king, and after Raghava his son,— so that, O 

* Historically Rama had but one wife. Manthara here anticipated that 
Rama would marry many wives like his father after the installation. — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 





A YODHVlKlNDAM . 



203 



Kaikeyi, Bharata will come to be at once cut off from the 
royal line. O emotional one, surely all the sons of the 
king do not obtain the kingdom. And if all were placed 
on the throne, mighty would be the disturbance therefrom. 
Therefore it is that kings, O Kaikeyi, lay the task of 
Government on the eldest son if worthy, or else upon a 
younger most meritorious. This thy son, O affectionate one, 
£ast off from the royal race, and deprived of happiness, 
will fare like one forlorn. Thou dost not understand that 
it is for thee that I am taking such pains; and it is 
evident that thou dost not understand that I have come 
to thee for thy good. Thou art conferring on me rewards 
on the advancement of thy co-wife. For certain, R&ma 
having attained the kingdom without let, will send Bharata 
either to a distant land, or to the other world. Bharata 
is a mere boy, and by thee it is that he hath been sent unto 
his maternal uncle’s mansion. Even in immobile objects 
attachment grows by virtue of nearness. Satrughna also 
ever following Bharata hath gone with him. He is attached 
unto Bharata as Lakshmana is attached unto R&ma. It is 
heard that once upon a time the woodmen had intended to cut 
down a tree ; but it was relieved from the high peril because 
of the proximity of prickly shrubs around it. Sumitri’s 
son protects R&ma and R9ghava protects Lakshmana. 
Their fraternal love like that of the Aswins is celebrated 
in the world. Therefore R&ma will never do any wrong 
unto Lakshmana ; but he will do wrong unto Bharata, there 
is no doubt about this. Therefore let that son of Raghu 
be sent unto the woods from the palace. This pleasetb 
me ; and this also is for thy supreme welfare ; and in 
this wise also will be realised the good of thy relations. 
But if Bharata can get at his ancestral kingdom by just 
means, that would also be welcome to thy kindred. That 
boy deserving of happiness is the natural enemy of R&ma. 
How can he live under the prosperous R&ma being deprived 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




204 



rAmAyana. 



of all wealth ? Therefore it behoveth thee to save Bharata 
about to be overcome by Rama, like a lion pursuing the 
leader of an elephant herd in a forest. Thy co-wife, Rama’s 
mother, had formerly through pride and good fortune been 
slighted by thee. Why will not she upon thee wreak her 
revenge now? When Rama will obtain the earth furnished 
with many oceans and mountains, then, O proud dame, 
thou rendered forlorn, wilt along with Bharata, sustain sorry 
discomfiture. And when Rama will obtain the earth, Bharata 
will certainly meet with destruction, therefore do thou ponder 
as to how thou canst place thy son on the throne, and banish 
thy enemy.” 



SECTION IX. 



Thus addressed, Kaikeyi, with her countenance flaming in 
wrath, sighing hot and hard, spoke unto MantharS, saying, — 
“Even this very day will I speedily send Rama into the 
forest and without delay install Bharata in the royal heir- 
apparentship. Do thou now see by what means I can effect 
this. Bharata must obtain the kingdom and never R&ma.” 
Thus addressed by the noble one, the wicked-minded 
Manthara*, envious of Rama’s interest, thus spoke unto 
Kaikeyi, — “Ah J O Kaikeyi, consider : Listen to my words, 
telling thee how thy son alone will obtain the kingdom. Dost 
thou not remember, O Kaikeyi, or concealest although remem- 
bering, wishing to hear from me of the means for thy welfare 
which thou thyself hadst before communicated unto me? If, 
O dalliance loving damsel, it is thy wish to hear it as told by 
me, listen thou, I will tell it thee. And having heard it, 
do thou act accordingly.” Hearing Manthara’s words, 
Kaikeyi raised herself a little from her tastefully spread bed, 
and said, — “Do thou tell me the means. By what means, O 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHYlKlNDAM 



205 



MantharS, Bharata will gain the kingdom, and in no wise 
Rama.” Thus addressed by the worshipful one, the wicked- 
minded MantharS, — envying RSma's interest, thus spoke unto 
Kaikeyi: — “Formerly during the wars of the gods and Asuras, 
thy husband taking thee along, went with the royal saints 
for the purpose of assisting the king of the celestials. 

0 Kaikeyi, in Dandaka, situated towards the south, 
there is the city known by the name of Vaijayanta, 
where dwelt Timidhvaja, otherwise called Samvara, 
—possessed of an hundred conjurations, and a mighty 
Asura. That unreproved one gave battle unto Sakra accom- 
panied by the celestials. And in that mighty conflict the 
R&kshasas during the night used to drag by main force persons 
asleep having their bodies cut all over, and kill them. Then 
King Da^aratha warred with the Asuras most heroically. And 
that mighty armed one, O worshipful lady, losing his senses 
in consequence of wounds received from weapons, was re- 
moved from the field by thee. In that imminent danger, thy 
husband, sadly cut by weapons, was preserved by thee. 
Thereupon gratified, he, O, thou of gracious presence, 
granted thee two boons. Whereupon thou didst say, — 'I shall 
receive from my lord the boon whenever I shall wish/ There- 
upon that high-souled one said, — ‘So be it/ I did not know 
anything about this, O respected one ; and it was thou who 
didst formerly communicate this (unto me). And it is because 

1 bear affection unto thee that I have not forgotten it. Now 
do thou forcibly make the monarch desist from installing 
R&ma ; and ask thy husband for these two boons, — the instal- 
lation of Bharata, and the exile of R2ma into the woods for 
fourteen years. On R&ma having been banished into the 
woods for fourteen years, thy son securing the affections of 
subjects, will be firmly established (on the throne). Entering 
the anger-chamber to day, do thou, O daughter of A^wapati, 
clad in soiled garment, lie down on the uncovered floor. 
Do not look at him, nor speak to him aught. Do thou on 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




206 



RlMlYANA. 



beholding the lord of the earth, over-whelmed with grief, weep 
only. Thou hast always been the favorite wife of thy husband. 
Of this I have not the least doubt. For thy sake the monarch 
can enter into a flame. He can never anger thee, nor can 
he eye thee when angered. For compassing thy pleasure 
the king can renounce life itself. Therefore the monarch can 
never set aside thy word. O senseless lady, do thou now 
reflect upon the strength of thy good fortune. King Da^aratha 
will offer thee rubies and pearls and gold and gems of various 
kinds ; but do not thou bend thy heart to them. Do thou, 0 
exalted dame, bring into Da9aratha , s recollection the two 
boons which he had granted thee at the time of the war between 
the gods and Asuras, and thou shalt not fail to achieve 
thy objects. And when that descendant of Raghu, raising 
thee will go to bestow the boons, do thou then binding 
him fast by oath, unfold unto the monarch the boons, saying,— 
'Send Rama unto the forest for nine and five years, and let 
Bharata, becoming on earth the foremost of monarchs, carry 
on the Government. , And Rama having been banished for 
fourteen years, thy son growing (in the interval) firm and fast, 
will remain (on the throne) during the rest of his life. Do 
thou, therefore, O worshipful one, demand even the banish- 
ment of R£ma ; for by this it is, O damsel, all interests will 
be secured unto thy son. Thus banished R&ma will no 
longer maintain possession of the hearts of the people ; and 
thy Bharata with his foes put out, will be the king. By the 
time that RSma returns from the forest, thy son, thy prudent 
son along with his friends, securing the hearts of the people 
externally and internally, will have been firmly established on 
the throne. Now is the time, I apprehend. Renouncing fear, 
do thou forcibly make the monarch remove from his miad his 
intention of installing R&ma.” 

Having been thus made to accept that for good which was 
really evil, Kaikeyi, desirous of obtaining the boons, was filled 
with delight. And at the words of the hump-backed woman, 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YOLHYAKlNDAM. 



207 



that exceedingly beautiful Kaikeyi experienced the height of 
surprise, and betook herself to this wrong course, like a mare 
attached to her young, (springing up after it). And she said 
unto Manthar£, — “O excellent wench, O speaker of things 
fair, thy wisdom I do not dishonor. In ascertaining the pro- 
priety or otherwise of actions, thou art the very first of hump- 
backed women on earth. And ever intent on my interest, 
thou seekest my welfare. I had not, O hump-backed one, 
(ere this) apprehended the endeavours of the king. O hump- 
backed one, there are many deformed, crooked and unsightly 
women (on earth) ; but thou alone down, lookest beautiful 
like a lotus bent by the breeze. Thy breast weighed down by 
thy hump, is high near the shoulders ; and beneath is thy 
belly graced with a goodly navel, which hath grown lean from 
shame (on holding the attitude of thy bust.) Thy buttocks 
are spacious ; and thy breasts are firm. Thy countenance 
is like the bright moon, Ah ! O Manthara,how lovely dost thou 
look ! Thy hips are smooth, and is decked with chains ; 
and thy thighs and legs are of large proportions. O Manthara, 
O thou clad in linen garment, O graceful damsel, with 
thy pair of spacious humps, thou goest before me like a she- 
crane. In thy heart reside all those thousand-conjurations 
belonging to that lord of the Asuras, Samvara ; and besides 
thousands there are many more. Intelligence and policy and 
conjurations reside in thy elevated hump resembling the nave 
of a chariot-wheel. When Bharata hath been installed and 
R&ma gone to the woods, I will, O hump-backed one, furnish 
thy hump with a garland made, O beautiful one, of well 
melted gold. And when I shall have attained my object and 
be happy, I will smear thy hump with sandal paste. O 
hump-backed one, I will prepare for thy face an excellent 
tilaka of gold ; as well as other ornaments. Wearing elegant 
apparel, thou wilt go about like a very goddess. With an 
incomparable countenance challenging the moon himself, 
thou wilt attain pre-eminence, defying thy foes. Even as 



Digitized by 



Google 




20S 



rAmAfana. 



thou servest me, other hump-backed women adorned with 
every ornament will serve thy feet.” 

Thus praised by Kaikeyi, as she was lying down on a 
white bed, like unto fire upon the sacrificial dais, Manthara 
addressed her, saying, — “O blessed one, when water has 
flown out, it is not proper to set up a dyke. Arise. Do thy 
welfare. Show thyself unto the king.” Puffed up with the 
pride of good fortune, that noble lady of expansive eyes thus 
encouraged (by Manthara), went with her to the anger- 
chamber. (Having entered the chamber), that exalted lady 
put off her pearl neck-lace priced at many hundreds and 
thousands of gold, together with other elegant, beautiful and 
rich ornaments. Then sitting down upon the ground, 
Kaikeyi, comparable unto gold, under the influence of 
Manthara's words, spoke unto her, saying — “Do thou, 0 
hump-backed one, tell the monarch, that I am dead at this 
place. On Raghava having gone to the forest, Bharata 
will obtain the earth. I do not require gold, or gems, or 
repasts ; this will be the end of my existence if RSma be 
installed.” 

Again the hump-backed woman addressed Bharata’s 
mother in exceedingly cruel language fraught with good unto 
Bharata and evil unto Rama, — “If RSghava attaineth the 
kingdom, thou wilt surely grieve along with thy son. There- 
fore, O blessed one, do thou strive so that thy son Bharata 
be installed.” 

Thus momentarily pierced by the wordy shafts shot by 
Manthar5, the queen exceedingly surprised, laying her hand 
on her bosom, wrathfully broke out, — “Either beholding me 
gone unto the regions of Death, thou wilt apprize the king of 
it, or Raghava repairing unto the forest for a long time, 
Bharata will attain his desire. If Raghava doth not repair 
hence into the forest, I will not desire beds, nor garlands, nor 
sandal paste, nor colyrium, nor meat, nor drinks, nor life.’ 
Having said these cruel words, and thrown off every oroa- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




a yodhyIkXndam 



209 



merit, the wrathful dame lay down on the ground having no 
covering, like a fallen Kinnari. Casting away her excellent 
garlands and ornaments with her countenance clouded with 
the gloom of wrath, the King’s wife became sunk in thought 
looking like a sky enveloped in darkness, with the stars hid. 



SECTION X . 



Thus perversely advised by the exceedingly wicked 
Manthar&, the noble and sagacious lady, influenced by passion, 
having completely decided in her mind as to her course, was 
lying down on the ground like a Kinnari pierced with poisoned 
shafts, and gradually told everything unto MantharSL And 
having made up her mind, that lady wrought up with ire, 
being under the influence of Manthar&’s words, sighed hot and 
hard like the daughter of a Nliga ; and for a while reflected 
on the way which was to bring her happiness.Then her friend 
and well-wisher MantharS, hearing of her resolution, rejoiced 
exceedingly, as if she had already secured success. And, 
having fully ascertained her course, that weak one being 
angry, lay down upon the floor, knitting her eyebrows. The 
ground was strewn with garlands and excellent ornaments 
which Kaikeyi had cast away ; and they adorned the earth 
as the stars adorn the welkin. Like an enfeebled Kinnari 
she clad in a soiled garment, binding fast her braid, lay 
down in the anger-chamber. 

The monarch having issued orders for the installation of 
R&ma, entered his inner apartment after giving permission to 
the courtiers to repair to their respective abodes. “To-day 
it has been fixed to install R£ma, but Kaikeyi has not yet 
heard of it” — thus thought the monarch. Therefore with 
the view of communicating the welcome news unto that lady 
deserving of good, (Kaikeyi), that renowned one of subdued 

*7 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




210 



RAteAYANA. 



senses entered the inner apartment. Like unto the moon 
entering the sky covered with white clouds and with R&hu 
present in it, that one of high fame entered the excel- 
lent apartment of Kaikeyi, having parrots and peacocks 
and Kraunchas and swans, resounding with the sounds of 
musical instruments, — containing hump-backed and dwar- 
fish women, graced with houses containing creepers, and pic- 
tures, and adorned with ashokas and champakas , furnished 
with daises composed of ivory and silver and gold, and ad- 
orned with trees bearing flowers and fruits always, and tanks, 
having superb seats made of ivory, silver and gold $ rich with 
various viands and drinks and edibles, with costly ornaments, 
and resembling heaven itself $ and the prosperous monarch 
having entered his own inner apartment did not see his dear 
Kaikeyi on the excellent bed. The lord of men not seeing 
his favorite wife, asked (within himself) and was struck 
with grief. Never before this that noble lady spent that 
hour ( at any other place ); nor had the monarch ever entered 
the empty apartment. Then the king entering the apart- 
ment asked (a sentinel) concerning Kaikeyi, not knowing that 
that unwise woman was hankering after her self-interest, as on 
previous occasions not finding her he used to ask. Thereupon 
hurriedly and with clasped hands, the warder said, -“Worship- 
ful sire, the noble lady exceedingly angry, hath repaired 
unto the anger chamber. ,, Hearing the warder’s word, the 
king exceedingly anxious, with his senses agitated and afflict- 
ed, again grieved. There burning with grief, the lord of the 
earth saw her lying down on the ground in an improper 
guise. And the sinless aged (monarch) saw on the ground 
his youthful wife dearer unto him than life itself, cherishing 
an unrighteous intention, — like a tom creeper, and lying 
down like a very goddess, resembling a Kinnari fallen from 
heaven because of sin, like a fallen Apsara, like unto an 
illusion spread to take another, and like an ensnared doe, or 
a she-elephant that has been pierced with an envenomed 



Digitized by 



Google 




A y ODHYX kAnda m. 



211 



shaft shot by a hunter. And himself resembling a mighty 
elephant in the midst of a forest, the king, exceedingly 
aggrieved, out of affection, gently passing his hand 
upon Kaikeyi’s person, thus addressed her furnished 
with eyes resembling lotus* petals, — °I do not know why 
thou hast been angry with me. O noble lady, who has 
reprimanded thee, or who has offended thee, that, O auspi- 
cious one, in this guise thou art lying down in dust enhancing 
my sorrow ? And wherefore art thou down on the ground, I, 
who seek thy welfare, being yet alive ? O thou that afflictest 
my heart, art like one under the influence of a malignant 
spirit, I have skilful physicians whom I have completely 
satisfied with gifts, — they will render thee whole. Do thou, 
O angry wench, mention thy malady. Whom dost thou wish 
to please ; and whom to displease ? Who shall to-day receive 
an welcome office, and who a highly unwelcome one ? Do 
not conceal thy thoughts, nor, O noble one, afflict thy 
person. Who, that should not be slain, shall be put to death ; 
and who that should, is to be set at liberty ? Who that is 
poor is to be made rich ; and who that is affluent is to be 
turned into a pauper? I and mine are at thy command. I 
dare not cross any wish of thine. Tell me thy mind, and I 
will satisfy thee by laying down life itself. Thou knowest 
the influence thou hast upon me, — therefore, it behoveth 
thee not to entertain any apprehension. By all my good 
deeds I swear that 1 will compass thy pleasure. The space 
that is lighted up by the solar disc is mine — the DrSviras, 
and the Sindhus, and the Sauviras, and Shurashtras and 
the Dakshinapathas, and the Baugas, and the Angas, and 
the Magadhas, and the Matsyas, and the flourishing Kasis 
and the Kosalas. In these are produced many things, wealth 
and corn and animals. Do thou, O Kaikeyi, ask for those 
things that thy mind may take a fancy to. What,0 timid one, 
is the use of afflicting thyself thus ? O beauteous damsel, 
arise, arise. Do thou, O Kaikeyi, unfold unto me /the cause 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




212 



RlMlYANA. 



whence hath proceeded thy fear. On hearing the reason, I 
will dispell it, even as the sun drieth up the dew/' 

Thus addressed and encouraged, she desirous of saying 
that disagreeable thing with the view of afflicting her lord 
still more, spoke unto him thus. 



SECTION XI. 

A_ND unto that ruler of the earth extremely under the 
influence of passion, Kaikeyi spoke cruelly, saying, — 
"O worshipful one, none has wronged or reprimanded 
me. I have a certain intention, which I wish that 
you will, carry out. If thou wilt execute that, do thou 
then promise to that effect, Then only will I express 
my desire.” Thereupon, by his hands placing Kaikeyi's 
head upon his lap, the mighty monarch, under the influence 
of passion, smiling fairly, addressed her lying on the ground, 
“O thou that art swollen with the pride of good fortune, 
thou knowest that foremost of men, R5ma excepted, there 
liveth not any that is dearer to me than thyself. I swear by 
that invincible prime of men even the high-souled RSghava — 
who is the stay of my existence. Do thou tell me thy heart's 
desire. By that Rama, Kaikeyi. whom if I do not see for 
a moment, I die for certain, do I swear that whatever thou 
wilt say I will accomplish. By that Rama, O Kaikeyi, fore- 
most of men — whom I hold dearer than my other sons, do 
I swear that, I will accomplish whatever thou wilt say. O 
gentle one, my heart is in what I say. Do thou, considering 
this, deliver me from this distress. Taking all this into 
consideration, do thou, O Kaikeyi, speak out what is in thy 
mind. Thou seest the pow'er thou wieldest in me, therfore 
it behoveth thee not to fear. I will do thy pleasure by my 
good deeds do I swear this.” 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHVAKlNDAM . 



213 



Thereat intent upon her own interests, that exalted dame 
seeing her own wish ( almost ) attained, assuming an attitude 
of intercession, being rejoiced, spoke harsh words ( unto the 
monarch ). And delighted at the king’s speech, she unfolded that 
dreadful intention of hers like unto the approaching death. — 
“Thou swearest* repeatedly, and conferrest on me a boon. Let 
the three and thirty deities headed by Indra, hear this. Let 
the Sun, and the Moon, and the Sky, and the Planets, and 
Night, and Day, and the Cardinal points, and the Universe, 
and the Earth, with the Gandharvas and Rakshasas, and the 
Rangers of the night, and all Beings, and the house-hold 
gods residing in dwellings, — together with all other crea- 
tures, — know thy utterances. Let all the deities hear that 
a highly energetic ..one speaking the truth, and pure, and 
cognizant of morality, and abiding by his promise, has 
conferred on me a boon’ 1 . Having entreated the monarch 
thus with a view to prevent him from swerving, and keeping 
him firm in his promise, she again addressed that mighty 
bowman, overcome by desire, who was ready to confer on 
her a boon, “Remember, O king, the incidents that took 
place formerly in the war between gods and Asuras. In- 
capable of taking thy life, thy enemy had rendered thee 
exceedingly feeble. Because, O respected Sir, I tending 
thee sleeplessly, preserved thee, thou didst grant me 
two boons. Entrusting the boons then with thee, do I now, 
O descendant of the Raghus, ask for them (at thy hands ), 
O lord of the earth. If having religiously promised to that 
effect, thou dost not confer the boon, this very day, will I, 
coming by this disgrace from thee, renounce my life,” 

When the king was completely brought under the in- 
fluence of Kaikeyi, he was ensnared by her speech for his des- 
truction, like a deer entering into the noose. Thereafter she 
thus spoke unto the king about to confer a boon, who was 
under the influence of passion, saying, — “Of the boons that 
thou hadst then promised me, I shall speak to-day : do thou 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




214 



RlMliVANA . 



listen to my words. Preparations are being made for ins- 
talling Raghava. Do thou with the provisions made ready 
install Bharata in the kingdom. O exalted one, the time 
has also come for thee to confer on me the second boon which 
thou being pleased had promised in the war of the gods and 
Asuras. Let the gentle Rama, clad in deer-skin, lead the life 
of a mendicant in the Dandaka.forest for the space of nine 
and five years. And let Bharata gain the heir-apparentship 
rid of thorns, Even this is my prime wish $ and I 
beseech thee but to grant the boon thou hast already 
promised. Even this very day will I see R&ma 
despatched to the woods. Do thou by proving true unto 
thy word, become the king of kings ; and preserve thy race, 
character, and birth. Truthful speech, say the ascetics, is 
of supreme welfare unto men in the next world.” 



SECTION XII . 



[T earing Kaikeyi’s fell speech, the monarch bewailed for 
a time, and then thought, — “Is this a day-dream unto me or has 
bewilderment befallen my senses ? Is this owing to influence 
of some evil spirit or has my mind been affected Thinking 
thus, the king could not arrive at the. origin of ( this phenome 
non); and then he swooned away. Then regaining his senses, he 
was filled with grief on recollecting Kaikeyi's words ; and 
pained and woe-begone, like unto a deer at the sight of a 
tigress, he fetched a deep sigh, and sat down on the uncover 
ed. ground. Like a venomous snake confined by power of 
incantation within a oircle, the lord of men, in indignation 
exclaimed, “O fie !” And deprived of his senses by grief, 
he again swooned away. After a long while, regaining bis 
senses, he extremely aggrieved, wrathfully, and as if burning 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYlKlNDAM. 215 

in energy, addressed Kaikeyi, saying, — “Thou cruel one ! 
Thou of vile ways ! Thou destroyer of this race ! O wicked 
woman, what has been done by Rama unto thee ; or what 
wrong have I done thee ? Raghava ever serveth thee as a 
mother. Why thou art then bent upon wronging him ? 
It is to bring down destruction upon myself that through 
ignorance I brought unto this house thee like unto a serpent 
of virulent poison. When all men show their regard for Rama’s 
virtues, for what transgression shall I forsake my dear son ? 
I may renounce Kau$alya or Sumitra or the kingdom, or life 
itself; but R 5 ma, filled with affection for his father, will I not 
renounce. I experience supreme delight on beholding my 
first-born ; and when I see him not, I lose my senses. The 
world may exist without the Sun ; and corn without water ; 
but this life doth not exist in this body without R 5 ma. Do 
thou then that entertainest unrighteous aims, abandon this 
intention of thine. I lay my head at thy feet. Be propitious 
unto me. Why dost thou, O sinful one, cherish in thy mind 
such a frightful idea? Thou (often) asked me whether I love 
Bharata or not. Be that which thou hadst formerly told me 
in favor of that descendant of Raghu. ‘That blessed one 
is my eldest son, and the most righteous of them all* even 
this, with the view of pleasing me, thou sweet speeched one 
had said. Now hearing of the installation of Rama, thou 
thyself filled with grief, art making me exceedingly aggrieved. 
Or in this empty chamber having been possessed, thou hast 
come under influence not thy own. And this signal lawless- 
ness, O exalted lady, has befallen the race of the Ikshwakus ; 
the cause of which, O Thou versed in moral laws.is thy mental 
derangement. Thou didst not formerly do unto me aught 
that was improper or disagreeable ; therefore, O thou of 
expansive eyes, I cannot rely upon thee (as sane). Thou didst, 
O girl, many a time tell me that R&ma was equal unto thee 
with the high-souled Bharata. Wherefore then, O bashful 
one, dost thou like that the illustrious and righteous RSLma, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




2 16 



RAMI y ANA. 



O exalted dame, should reside in the forest for five and nine 
years ? Why dost thou like that the exceedingly tender RSma 
with his soul established in virtue, should dwell in the 
woods, undergoing terrible hardship ? Why dost thou, O thou 
of graceful eyes, wish R5ma, captivating all creatures, and 
engaged in ministering unto thee, to be banished ? RSma 
verily serveth thee far more than doth Bharata ; and I do not 
find that Bharata regardeth thee more than Rama. Who will, 
save that foremost of men, so devotedly minister unto thee, 
regard thee, enhance thy influence, and do thy will. Not one 
of the many thousands of females and the innumerable 
retainers (in the palace), has been able to fasten reproach upon 
Rama for real or false'misconduct. Soothing all creatures 
with a pure heart, that great soul by means of good officers 
secureth the affections of the inhabitants of the kingdom. 
He conquers all the twice-born ones by gifts ; and that hero 
conquers his superiors by ministrations ; and his enemies 
by encountering them with the bow. For certain, in 
RSghava are truth and charity, and asceticism, and self-renun- 
ciation, and friendship, and purity, and sincerity, and learning, 
and the disposition to tend his superiors. How, O respected 
one, canst thou ask for this that will bring thee sin, touching 
Rima endowed with candour, and energetic like unto a 
Maharshi, and resembling a celestial ? 1 do not recollect to 

have heard Rama, who ever speaks sweet words, to have used 
any unpleasant speech to any one ; how can 1 then for thy sake 
unfold this disagreeable matter unto the beloved Rama ? And 
what stay have I save him in whom abide forgiveness, and asce- 
ticism and renunciation, and verity, and righteousness, and 
gratitude, and harmless towards all creatures. It behoveth 
thee, O Kaikeyi, to have pity on me, aged and on the verge of 
death, and afflicted with'grief, and distressed, and engaged 
in lamentations. Whatever can be obtained in this earth 
bounded by the ocean I will confer on thee— do thou not bring 
about my death. O Kaikeyi, I clasp my palms, I fall at thy 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYlKJiNDA M 21 7 

feet, be thou the protector of Rama, so that sin may not 
taint me.” 

When the terrible Kaikeyi in still more terrible language 
addressed the mighty king, who was burning in grief, and 
bewailing, and deprived of his senses, and feeling a sensation 
of whirling, and overwhelmed with woe, and again and again 
beseeching for crossing this ocean of sorrow, saying. “If, O 
monarch, having conferred the boon, thou repentest afterwards 
how, O hero, wilt thou speak of thy righteousness in the 
world ? When ,0 thou versed in duty, the RSLjarshis assembled 
around thee, shall ask thee regarding this matter, what wilt 
thou answer ? Wilt thou say/by whose favor do I live and who 
had tended me, unto that Kaikeyi have I broken my promise Y 
Surely, O lord of men, thou wilt bring disgrace unto all the 
monarchs (of thy line), since having conferred the boons this 
very day, thou speakest otherwise. Saivya granted his own 
flesh unto the bird in the matter of the hawk and the pigeon * 
And Alarka, having granted his eyes (unto a blind Brahmin) 
attained excellent state. And the ocean, having bound him- 
self by promise, never passes beyond his shores. Remember 
ing these old stories render not thy promise nugatory. O 
thou of perverted understanding, renouncing righteousness, 
and installing RSLma in the kingdom, thou wishest ever to give 
thyself up to pleasure with Kau£alya. Whether what I have 
proposed be righteous or otherwise, whether thou hast promised 
truly or falsely, swerve not from thy word. If thou install 
R£ma, this very day drinking poison, I will surely die before 
thee. If I for a single day behold Rama’s mother receiving 
homage rendered with clasped hands, I will consider death 

* The story goes that desirous of testing the charity of Saivya, Indra 
and Agni assuming the forms of a hawk and a pigeon respectively, went to 
the king, the former pursuing the latter. The pigeon in a fright asked the 
protection of the monarch, whereon he granted it. But the hawk urged, 
•why dost thou retain the food that has been appointed by Providence V 
But the king declined, and cut off his own flesh and gave it unto the 
hawk.— T. 

28 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





Rl Ally ANA. 



*18 

even as welcome, O lord of men, by Bharata’s self dear unto 
me as my own life, I swear that save the exile of R&ma, 
nothing shall satisfy me/’ 

Having said this, Kaikeyi paused ; and maintained 
silence disregarding the bewailing monarch. The king with 
his senses overwhelmed with grief, hearing Kaikeyi’s 
exceedingly bitter words, reflected on R£ma’s abode in 
the woods, and the advancement of Bharata, and being 
bewildered for a while spoke not unto Kaikeyi ; but gazed 
steadfastly at that exalted dame, his beloved wife, who 
had uttered disagreeable things. And having heard that 
speech resembling a thunder-bolt, and unpleasant to 
the heart, and surcharged with grief, the king was extremely 
pained. Then recollecting that revered lady's resolve, 
and his own terrible oath, he, sighing forth, — “O Rima,” 
dropped down like a felled tree. And then that master 
of the earth being deprived of his sense, was like a mad 
man, or a patient with his faculties wildered, or a serpent 
whose energy has been exhausted. In sad and distressful 
words, he addressed Kaikeyi, saying, — “Who is it that has 
convinced thee that this exceedingly heinous course is a 
proper one ? Dost thou not feel shame to speak thus unto me, 
like one whose faculties have been possessed by an evil 
spirit ? I did not know before, when thou wast youthful that 
thy nature was so perverted ; but now I find the very reverse 
of what I then thought. Whence proceedeth thy fear that thou 
askest for such a boon — the establishment of Bharata in the 
kingdom, and the banishment of Rama into the woods ? Do 
thou cease to urge such a suit that is fraught with evil unto 
thy wifely virtue, and that will render my word untrue, if 
thou wishest for the good of thy husband, of the people, and 
Bharata. O cruel woman ; O thou that intendest sinfully, O 
base wretch, O doer of impious deeds, how have I and Rima 
conspired against thy happiness ; and what offence dost thou 
find in us ? Bharata will by no means accept the king- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYlKlNDAM. 



219 



dom, depriving Rama of it, for I consider Bharata a still 
more grounded in righteousness than Rama himself. When 
I shall say, — “Repair unto the forest,” and Rama’s counte- 
nance will fall, like unto the moon overwhelmed by Rahu, how 
shall I behold it ? How shall I, having in consultation with 
my friends come to this decision, retract the same, like unto 
an army defeated by the enemy ? And what will the mon- 
archs coming from various quarters say concerning me, — 
“Alas ! how has this puerile descendant of Ikshwaku 
reigned so long ?* And when many aged folks, endowed with 
virtues, and accomplished in various lore will ask me con- 
cerning Kakutstha, what then shall I sav unto them. — c Sore 
pressed by Kaikeyi, have I banished Rama ? Even if I 
speak this truly, yet none will lend credence to it And what 
will Kaucalya say unto me, when Rama shall have gone to 
the forest ? Having done her this mighty wrong, what 
shall I say unto her ? KaucalyS serves me at the sametime like 
a slave, and a friend, and wife, and sister, and mother. Ever 
studious of my welfare, dearly loving her son, and speak- 
ing every one fair, that exalted lady, although deserving of 
homage at my hands, has up to this time not been regarded 
by me, because of thee. That I have so long sought thy 
welfare, afflicteth me now, even like rice partaken by a sick 
person with curries that are unhealthful. Beholding Rama 
deprived of his kingdom, and banished unto the forest, why 
will Sumitra alarmed believe in me. Ah ! woe to me ! Vaidehi 
will have to hear of two evil events, — my death and 
Rama’s journey unto the woods. Alas ! my Vaidehi, indulg- 
ing in grief, will renounce her existence, like a Kinnari on 
the side of the Himavat, who has been forsaken by her kin- 
nara. When I shall witness Rama repairing to the mighty 
forest, and Sita weeping ( in grief) , I shall not hope for a long 
life ; and thou, becoming a widow, will reign along with thy 
son. Like unto a goodly liquor, which people having par- 
taken it, subsequently find to contain poison, I have found 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




220 



RXMlYANA. 



thee, who had passed for a chaste woman, to be now really 
unchaste. Having soothed me with soft but false words, 
thou speakest thus. Thou hast killed me like a deer that has 
been entrapped by a hunter, having been allured into the net 
through the sound of a song. Surely gentle folks will on the 
high-way censure me as one lost to gentility,— as one who has 
sold his son (for buying his wife's good graces), even like a 
Br&hmana given to drinking. Alas ! alas ! having promised 
thee the boon, I have to bear these words of thine ; and have 
come by this grief like unto evil consequent upon misdeeds 
in a previous existence. Wretch as I am, like a halter set 
round one's neck, have I, O vile woman, cherished thee 
through ignorance. Not knowing thee for my death, I have 
sported with thee, like an infant dallying in solitude with a 
venomous snake. Surely, people will be justified in con- 
demning me wicked-minded that I am, for my son having 
been deprived of his ancestral kingdom by me;sayiig,— 
“Alas ! king Da^aratha is foolish and lustful ; for he sends 
his beloved son to the woods for the sake of his wife.” R&ma 
has grown emaciated by studyng the Vedas, leading the 
Brahmacharyya mode of life, and serving his preceptors,— 
will he again undergo this mighty toil at this time of enjoy- 
ment ? My son is incapable of uttering a second word unto 
me ; and commissioned, he will repair to the woods, saying, 
•Very well. , if ordered with ‘Go to the forest,' RSghava 
does not consent, even that would conduce to my pleasure ; 
but he will do nothing of the kind. And R&ghava having 
gone to the forest, Death will surely summon me away to his 
abode who am of exceedingly reprehensible character, and who 
am universally execrated. And I having been dead and that 
best of men, R&ma, having gone to the woods (I do not know) to 
what a plight thou wilt bring my kindreds. And if Kau^alyl 
loses me and R&ma, and Sumitra loses her two sons and 
me and R&ma, then tormented with the extreme of grief, 
those exalted ladies will follow me. Do thou, O Kaikeyi, 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHYAKXNDAM. 



221 



casting into hell Kau£aly& and SumitrS and myself with our 
three sons, attain happiness. Renounced by me as well as 
Rlima, this lkshwaku line existing from a time immemorial, 
and ennobled by excellent qualities, and incapable of coming 
by grief, thou wilt rule, when it shall have been overwhelmed 
with misfortune. If the banishment of Rama, be agreeable 
to Bharata let him not, when I am dead, perform my funeral 
obsequies. When I am dead, and when that foremost of men 
has gone to the forest, do thou, a widow, rule the kingdom 
along Vith thy son. O daughter of a king, when by chance 
thou residest in my mansion, I must come by signal 
infamy and discomfiture in the world, and meet with 
general disregard, like unto a sinful person. How having 
always gone on cars and elephants and horses, will dear 
R&ma range in the forest on foot ? How will my son, 
at the approach of whose meal-time, cooks wearing 
ear-rings and emulating each other prepare excellent 
meats and drinks, pass his days, living on fare furnished 
by the woods, of astringent, or bitter, or pungent taste ? 
How will he, who has always been clad in costly attire, 
and who has always enjoyed happiness, will dwell on the 
bare earth, wearing a piece of red cloth ? From whom 
hast thou received this inconceivable and dreadful advice, — 
Rama’s journey to the woods and installation of Bharata ? 
Fie upon women, crafty and selfish ! But I must not name 
all women — I mean only the mother of Bharata. O thou that 
art intent upon doing mischief unto all, O thou addicted to 
selfishness, O cruel one, has God made thy mind so very 
vile, only to torment me ? What wrong hast thou come by 
either through me, or R£ma ever engaged in thy welfare f 
On beholding R£ma plunged in sorrow, fathers will forsake 
sons, and wives attached,,' unto their husbands will forsake 
them, and the entire earth will be affected with ill-humour. 
When I hear him coming, adorned like unto a son of the 
celestials, I rejoice on casting my eyes on him, and I feel as 



Digitized by (jOCK^Ic 




til 



rAmIvana. 



if I had regained my youth. Men may do without the Sun, 
and the wielder of the thunder-bolt not raining, but none, I 
apprehend, can live, on witnessing Rama repairing hence. I 
have kept in my mansion, like unto my own death, thee that 
desirest my destruction, and art intent upon doing me wrong, 
and art my foe. I have for a long time held thee oil ray 
lap, like unto a she-snake of virulent poison ; therefore in 
consequence of my folly, I now meet with destruction. Now 
dissevered from me, and RSLma together with Lakshmana, let 
Bharata govern the city and the kingdom along with thee. 
Destroying thy relatives, do thou enhance the joy of my 
enemies. O thou cruelly-disposed, O thou bringer on of cala- 
mities, since banishing all sense of the relation in which 
we stand to each other as husband and wife, thou hast 
spoken thus, why reduced to thousand fragments thy teeth 
drop not from off thy mouth down to the ground ? R&ma 
has not used any harsh speech towards thee. Indeed R&ma 
knows no harsh speech ; why then dost thou seek to 
inflict upon R&ma ( ever ) pleasant spoken, and endowed 
with agreeable qualities — such wrongs. O thou that render- 
est infamous the king of the Kekayas, whether thou becomest 
miserable, or enterest into fire, or killest thyself ( by taking 
poison ), or divest into the bowels of the earth opened at 
thousand places, I will not execute thy fell intention that is 
fraught with evil unto me. I do not wish, that thou, like unto 
a razor, and ever speaking pleasant falsehoods, and possessed 
of a vile heart, the destroyer of thy own race, — thou that 
wishest to burn my heart and life, thou unbeautiful one, 
mayst remain alive. My life itself is in jeopardy, — where 
then is my happiness ? Where is the happiness of parents 
without their sons ? It behoveth thee not, O noble dame, 
to do evil unto me. I take hold of thy feet ; be thou 
propitious unto me. 11 As bewailing thus like one forlorn 
the ruler of earth whose heart was captivated by Kaikeyi on 
account of her supreme beauty proceeded to take hold of 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYlKXNDAM . 223 

her feet, who having banished all self respect, sat with 
her legs stretched, he, without being able to come at them, 
fell down in a swoon, like one enfeebled with disease. 



SECTION XIII. 



Then as the mighty king was lying down in this unbeseem- 
ing and improper guis*, like Yayati dropped from the 
celestial regions when his religious merit had been ex- 
hausted, that lady, personating the ruin of the race, not 
fearing public odium, who had discerned danger from 
R&ma unto Bharata, not having attained her wish, again 
addressed the monarch, concerning the boon he had 
promised unto her, — Thou describest thyself, O mighty 
monarch, as speaking the truth and firm in vow. Why then 
dost thou hesitate to confer this boon on me f” Thus address 
ed by Kaikeyi king Da^aratha, remaining stupified for a while 
thus answered her in wrath, — “O ignoble one ! O enemy of 
mine ! On my being dead, and that chief of men, Rama, 
reparing to the woods, do thou, thine wish attained, become 
happy. When in heaven, questioning me as to Rama’s wel- 
fare, the celestials, learning of his banishment to the woods, 
will tax me on this score, how shall I also bear that reproach 
of theirs ? If I shall truthfully say I have sent Rama to the 
woods for compassing Kaikeyi’s pleasure, that will count for 
a falsehood. Sonless first, I have obtained the exceedingly 
energetic anJ mighty Rama by great pain, — how can I then 
renounce him ? How shall I banish Rama having eyes resem 
bling lotus’ petals, who is heroic, and accomplished and of 
subdued anger, and forgiving. How shall I dismiss unto Dan 
daka the charming Rama of dark blue hue like that of a blue 
lotus, possessed of mighty arms, and having great strength ? 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 







RlMlYANA. 



How shall 1 behold the intelligent Rama in evil plight, who 
has never known suffering, and has always enjoyed felicity ? If 
without inflicting injury upon R&ma, I meet with death, 
I shall then attain happiness. O cruel Kaikeyi, O thou 
of evil purpose, why dost thou do this wrong unto my beloved 
Rima having truth for prowess ? If I banish R&ma, an un- 
paralleled obloquy will surely darken ( my fair fame ). 

As king Dagaratha was bewailing thus with a heart vyrought 
up with grief, the suu set and night came on. But al- 
though crested with the lunar disc, the night failed to 
bring comfort unto the king, distressed, and indulging 
iu grief. Then the old king Dagaratha, with his eyes fixed 
at the sky, sighing hot, lamented in this strain — f< 0 night 
studded with stars, I beseech thee, let not the morning appear. 
Do thou, O gentle one, do me this kindness. I do thus clasp 
my hands (by way of supplication). Or do thou speedily 
repair for I do not wish to see the hated and relentless Kai- 
keyi, who has brought this calamity upon me”. Having 
spoken thus, the king conversant with the duties of Sovereigns 
again endeavoured to propitiate Kaikeyi, saying, — “O noble 
dame, do thou show favour unto me, who am of honest ways, 
who am distressed, who have made myself thine, who have 
finished his life, and who, in especial, am thy king. That I 
have spoken to thee thus was because, O thou of shapely hips, 
I had been deprived of my senses (through grief). O girl, do 
thou show thy favour unto me, — be thou generous, — be thou 
propitious. Let my R£ma obtain the kingdom in fact 
conferred by thee. Thereupon, O thou having the outer 
corner of thy eyes of dark blue hue, thou wilt attain high 
fame (among men). O thou of well-developed hips, do thou 
do this act of benefit unto me and R&ma and the people and 
the superiors, and Bharata”. 

Having heard the exceedingly piteous words of her 
husband, the king of pure sentiment, who was distressed, 
with his eye rendered coppery and flowing with tears, that 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYlKlNDAM. 



225 



wicked minded and merciless woman spoke not. Thereat 
seeing* that his favourite dissatisfied wife persisted in urging 
the banishment of his son, the king struck with grief, again 
fell down to the earth, senseless. As the wise king afflicted 
with sorrow was sighing hot and hard, the night passed away. 
Then as the eulogists _ attempted to sing his praises for 
awakening him, he prohibited them to do so. 



SECTION XIV. 

» 9 r: 

Then that sinful woman, seeing the descendant of 
Ikshwaku distressed on account of his son, and deprived of 
conciousness, and lying inert on the ground, spoke unto him, 
saying, — “Having promised to grant me the boon, how dis- 
tressed dost thou lie on the ground, as if thou didst commit 
some sin ? It behoveth thee to keep untainted thy dignity 
by performing what thou hast promised. Truth, say persons 
cognizant of it, is the prime virtue. And it is in the interests 
of virtue, that I have been exhorting thee. Having promised 
his own person unto the hawk, that lord of earth, Saivya, 
having granted the same unto the bird, went the excellent 
way. In the same manner, Alarka, being asked, plucked out 
his eyes readily and bestowed them on a certain Brahmana 
versed in the Vedas. And the lord of rivers, having promised, 
even on occasions of Parvas, does not pass over his 
bounds for the sake of truth. The one syllable ( Onkar ) signi- 
fying Brahma is the truth itself, In truth is established righte- 
ousness. Truth is the undecaying Vedas, and through truth 
people attain the foremost state. If thy mind is established 
in virtue, do thou then follow truth. Since, O excellent one, 
thou hast promised the boon, let that boon bear fruit. Do 
thou, incited by me w r ith the view of maintaining virtue, 
banish Rama. Thrice, do I tell thee. If thou dost not fulfil 
29 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




226 



RlMlrANA. 



this noble vow, O worshipful Lord, thou hast made unto me, 
forsaken by thee will I even in thy very presence renounce 
my life.” 

Thus fearlessly urged by Kaikeyi, the king could not 
take off from himself the noose (of promise), even as B&li 
could not take off the noose that had been fixed upon him 
(by Upendra) at the instance of Indra. Thereupon, the 
king looked blank, and his heart became agitated, like 
unto a beast of burden moving tortuously when placed 
within the yoke and wheels. Then calming himself 
with a great effort, the king, as if not seeing Kaikeyi, with 
his haggard eyes, addressed her, saying, — “I do here, 

0 wicked wretch, renounce that band of thine which 

1 had held with mantras before the sacrificial fire, and 
I do also renounce along with thee own-begotten* 
tby son Bharata. O exalted one, the night has departed ; 
and as soon as the Sun rises, the superiors will surely 
urge me for installing R&ma with the provisions that have 
been procured for the purpose. But if, O thou of auspicious 
ways, binderest the installation of RSLma, R&ma will perform 
my funeral obsequies, when 1 am dead, — and not thou 
accompanied by thy son shalt perform the same. That 
countenance of R&ma which 1 have once seen expanded in 
delight, I shall never be able to behold bereft of joy and 
cheerfulness, and down, with melancholy clouding it.” 

As the high-souled ruler of earth was speaking thus unto 
her, the night engarlanded with the moon and stars was 
succeeded by the morning. Then Kaikeyi of vile ways 
versed in speech, rendered senseless by wrath, again addressed 
the monarch in harsh language, saying, — “What words, 
O king, dost thou say, comparable unto poison or painful 
indispositions. It behoveih thee to summon hither tby 
sqq, the energetic R&ma. Having established my son in 

* This is a new coinage rendered necessary for the exegencies of translation. 
If 'first born' is justifiable, 'own-begotten/ is also such.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



A YG&firAKkNDAM. 



ny 

the kingdom, and rendered R&ma a ranger of the woods 
and made myself rid of rivals, I shall attain my end.” Thus 
urged by Kaikeyi, the king like unto an excellent steed 
Stung by a sharp goad, again spoke unto her,— “I have been 
bound fast by the ties of virtue, — therefore have I lost my 
senses. I now only wish to behold my beloved eldest son — 
the righteous R§ma.” 

Then when the night had gone by and day broke and 
the Sun arose, and when the sacred astral hour had 
arrived, Vasishtha endowed with many virtues, surrounded by 
his disciples and furnished with the provisions, entered that 
foremost of cities, whose streets had been swept and watered 
and which had been decorated with streamers, and which was 
filled with people rejoicing, and whose stalls overflowed with 
articles, and which resounded with the noise of festivity, and 
which was populous with folks eager for the installation of 
RSghava, and which was every where scented with sandal 
and dhupa and aguru . Having entered the city, like unto 
the metropolis of Purandara himself, he saw the graceful 
inner apartment decked with innumerable standards, and 
which was thronged with citizens and the inhabitants of the 
provinces, and graced with Br&hmanas cognizant of sacrifices, 
and crowded with highly worshipful assistants at sacrifice, 
entered the inner apartment and passed by that press. 
Vasishtha exceedingly delighted, surrounded by great saints, 
saw at the gate of the charioteer of that great one, — who at the 
same time was his counseller of gracious looks. Therefore 
the highly energetic Vasishtha said unto the skilful son of the 
charioteer,— “Do thou speedily acquaint the mighty monarch 
that I have come. Here are golden vessels filled with water 
from the Gang& and the ocean ; and for the installation, an 
excellent udumvara seat, and all kinds of seeds, and scents 
and various gems, and honey, and curds and clarified butter 
and fried paddy, and milk, and sacrificial grass, flowers 
and milk, and eight good-looking maids, and an excellent 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




228 



rAmAyana. 



mad elephant, a car yoked with four horses, and a sword, 
and an elegant bow, and a carriage containing men, and 
an umbrella like unto the moon, and two white chowries, 
and a golden vase, and a pale-colored bull tethered with a 
golden chain and bearing a hump adorned with ornaments, 
and a mighty lion — the best of his race — furnished with 
four teeth, and a throne, and a tiger-skin, and sacrificial fuel, 
and fire, and all kinds of musical instruments, and courtezans 
decked out with ornaments, and preceptors and Brahmanas, 
and cows, and various kinds of pure animals and birds — have 
been brought. The foremost citizens aud inhabitants of the 
provinces and the merchants with their retinue, — all these 
and others, with hearts filled with joy, and mouth speaking 
pleasant words, stay with the sovereigns to witness the 
installation of Rama. Do thou urge expedition upon the 
mighty monarch, so that this day under the influence of the 
Pushya star Rama may obtain the kingdom. 11 

Hearing these words of his, the charioteer's son possessed 
of mighty strength, eulogizing that powerful monarch, 
entered his quarters. And advanced in years, he had before 
this been granted free access everywhere, — so that the 
warders, loved of the king and seeking his good, could not 
prevent his entrance. Not knowing the plight that had 
befallen the king, Sumantra presenting himself before him, 
endeavoured to gladden the latter with pleasing speech. 
And having entered the apartment of the king, the charioteer 
Sumantra with clasped hands, pleasing the monarch as he 
proceeded, said, — “Do thou please us delightedly and with 
a glad heart, even as the strong ocean pleases people at the 
rising of the sun. The charioteer Matuli used to hymn Indra 
at this season, and (encouraged by that eulogy) he conquered 
the Danavas. Even so do I hymn thee. And even as the 
Vedas with the Angas and other lore indoctrinate the 
self-create lord Brahma, so do I enlighten thee. As the sun 
in company with the moon enlightens the fair earth con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



A YODHYlKlNDAM 



2*9 



taining creatures, so do I to-day enlighten thee. Arise, O 
foremost of monarchs,clad in excellent attire and decked with 
ornaments, like unto the sun issuing from the (mount) Meru. 
All the articles necessary for the installation of Rama are 
ready. And the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces 
and the merchants stay with clasped hands. And the 
worshipful Vasishtha stays with the Brahmanas. Do thou, 
O king, immediately order the installation of Rama. Like 
unto cattles without their keeper, like unto an army without 
its commander, like unto a night without the moon, like 
unto kines without their bull, is a kingdom without a king.” 

Hearing these words of Sumantra, bland and appropriate, 
the lord of earth was afresh overwhelmed with grief. Then 
the graceful and virtuous king, waxing disconsolate, on 
account of his son, and with his eyes reddened with the effect 
of grief, seeing the charioteer, said, — “This eulogy of thine 
pains me the more.” 

Hearing those sorrowful words and finding the lord of 
earth aggrieved thus, Sumantra with clasped hands went off 
a little. Seeing the king utterly incapable of speaking any 
thing personally owing to his heavy sorrow, Kaikeyi, the best 
counsellor in matters like these, addressed Sumantra with the 
following words : — “Sumantra, being elated with joy on 
account of R&ma’s installation, the king has kept up the 
whole night, and being tired therefore, is overpowered with 
sleep. Go ye therefore speedily, O charioteer, and bring Rama 
here, the praiseworthy son of king. This will do you good- 
do not hesitate in this. “How can I go," replied Sumantra, 
“without the permission of the king ?” 

Hearing these words of the counsellor, the king spoke to 
him “Sumantra, bring the beautiful RSma here — I want to 
see him.” Thinking that some good would accrue to Rama, 
he was pleased at heart and away he went speedily delighted 
at the royal mandate. Being asked again by Kaikeyi to hurry 
on at the time of departure Sumantra thought within himself— 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




230 



RlMlVANA. 



“Evident it is that the Queen has become impatient to see 
R&ma’s installation and hence is the hurry — and the king 
will now take rest." Thinking this the energetic charioteer 
with great delight intent on seeing R£ma, issued out of 
the city like a lake near the ocean. Having come out of the 
presence of the king suddenly, he saw the warders, various 
citizens and great personages sitting at the gate. 



SECTION XV. 

The Br^hmana, versed in Veda, the counsellors, the com- 
manders of military forces and the leading merchants, together 
with the royal priest, all brimming with joy on account of 
Rama's installation, were waiting at the royal gate all night 
long. On the appearance of the bright Sun, on the approach 
of the day under the astral influence of Pushya and on the 
ascension of Karkata } the presiding star of Rama's birth, they 
brought all articles necessary for the installation and as 
ordered by the best of Brahmanas — namely ; gold, earthen jar 
(for preserving water,) well ornamented excellent seats, chariot 
with a coverlet of splendid tiger-skin, water brought from 
the sacred confluence of the Ganges and Jamuna, from other 
holy streams, lakes, wells, ponds and rivers full of water flowing 
in the East, over mountains,and from the North to the South ; 
and waters brought from all the oceans, honey, curd, clarified 
butter, fried paddy, sacrificial grass, milk, flowers, eight un- 
married girls exquisitely beautiful, a mad elephant, gold and 
silver jars, adorned with fig leaves and lotuses and filled with 
holy water, a best yellow chowri for R&ma crested with jewels 
and resembling the bright rays of the moon ; a brilliantly 
ornamented beautiful umbrella of yellow colour, resembling 
the disc of the moon, and the most important of all the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYlKlNDAM. 23 1 

articles necessary for installation ; a well adorned yellow ox 
and horse ; and all musical instruments,— bringing these and 
all other things necessary for the installation of the descend- 
ants of Ikshaku, in accordance with the king's permission, 
the panegyrists and other persons were assembled there. Not 
finding the king present there, they began to speak amongst 
themselves: — 41 Who will intimate the king of our arrival ? 
The Sun is up and we do not see the king amongst us 
as yet. AH articles necessary for the installation of the 
intelligent Rama are ready.” While they were thus 
conversing, the charioteer Sumantra, well respected by 
the king, reached there and spoke unto all those persons 
and the kings the following words. “With the king's per- 
mission I am going to bring R£ma speedily here. Worshipful 
you are all to the king and specially to R2ma, 1 shall with 
your words, ask the king of his sound sleep, and theu of 
the reasons for his not coming here as yet though up from the 
bed.” Saying thus, Sumantra, versed in legends, arrived at 
the gate of the royal seraglio. And he entered the palace 
with its open gates ; and having entered the appartment of 
the lord of earth he went into bis sleeping room, and placing 
himself behind a screen near at hand, addressed the descend- 
ant of Raghu thus, pleasing him with blessings fraught with 
good unto him — “Oh ! KSLkutstha, may the Moon, Sun, Siva, 
Vaisravana, (the god of wealth), Varuna, (the god of water), 
Agni and Indra grant thee victory. The worshipful night 
is gone and blessed morn has arrived ; arise, Oh ! thou great 
king, and perform morning ablutions. Brahmanas, commanders 
and meichants are assembled at the palace gate, desirous of 
seeing thee, do thou therefore arise,- Oh descendant of Raghu.” 
Peiceiving from the voice that it was charioteer Sumantra 
versed in good counsels, who was thus eulogising, the king 
rose up from his bed and thus addressed him “O Charioteer 
'Bring R&ma here* was the order I gave thee ; what is it 
that makes thee neglect my command ? I am not asleep ; 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




* 3 * 



RlAlXyANA. 



go and bring up Rama here instantly.” Saying this, king 
Da^aratha despatched Sumantra again. 

Hearing the words of the king and bowing him with his 
head down, he issued out of the king’s residence, thinking that 
some great good was awaiting. And having reached the 
public roads adorned with flags and pennons, he, filled with 
an excess of joy, began to wend his way, casting his look 
around. There on his way he heard the passers by, all 
talking about Rama and his installation, as if brimming 
with joy on that account. Then proceeding a little, Sumantra 
saw the beautiful palace of Rima towering like the Kaila^a 
hill and resembling the abode of Sakra. It was closed 
with two big pannels at the gate way (of which the trap-door 
was flung open), and adorned with hundreds of terraces, 
on its top were many idols made of gold, and arches crested 
with pearls and diamonds; its colour was white as the 
autumnal cloud and bright as the golden cave of Sumeru ; 
it was ornamented with highly brilliant jewels set in the 
garlands of gold flowers and strewn with pearls and diamonds 
and sprinkled with sandal and Aguru } the fragrance of which 
captivates the mind like the summit of the hill Dardura ; 
it was graced with the presence of Sarasas and peacocks 
emitting pleasant sounds; and covered with well-made figures 
of wolves aud pictures of artistic excellence, the splendour 
of which captivates the mind and the eye as well ; bright 
as the sun and moon, resembling the abode of Kuvera 
and the capital of the king of the celestials j filled with 
brids of various kinds and high as the summit of Sumeru , 
Sumantra saw the palace filled with people coming from 
different quarters with clasped hands, and adorned with citizens 
approaching with various presents and eager tto see the instal- 
lation of Rami) and (standing at the gate)being prevented by 
the warders to enter ; resembling a huge cloud, of picturesque 
situation, spacious, strewn with pearls and diamonds and 
crowded with servauts. That charioteer, in his chariot with 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



A YODH yAKANDA M. 



*33 



ils wooden ledge and horses, beautifying the crowded streets 
and pleasing the citizens, entered the abode of R&ma. There- 
upon arriving at this abode filled with wealth, and having its 
beauty greatly intensified with deers and peacocks, moving 
to and fro, resembling the exqusitely splendid palace of the 
lord of the celestials, that charioteer was extremely enraptured, 
having the hairs of the body erect. Then that charioteer 
entering several apartments, well adorned and resembling the 
Kaila9a hill and the abode of the celestials and passing by 
many persons, dear unto RSma and abiding in his purpose, 
entered the apartment of the ladies. And he became exceed- 
ingly pleased on hearing pleasant words, meaning well unto 
the son of the king, from all persons, engaged in some sort 
of service for the installation. He saw the pleasant abode 
of Rama, resembling that of Mahendra , and filled with 
deers and birds, having its top high as the summit of 
Meru and situated well in splendour, and the gateway filled 
with millions of citizens with clasped hands keeping their 
conveyances outside and coming from various quarters with 
presents for R£ma.. He saw there a wild elephant by the 
name of Satrunjaya or the conqueror of foes, having a huge 
boiy resembling a mountain enveloped in dark clouds, 
beautiful, capable of bearing the goading hook and intend- 
ed as R&ma’s conveyance. He saw well adorned ministers 
dear unto the king with horses, chariots and elephants ; and 
leaving them all on either side, entered unprevented, 
like unto the marine monster Makara entering the ocean 
containing many pearls and diamonds, the splendid apart- 
ment of the ladies, resembling the clouds that hover over 
the summit of the Hill HimSdri, and having a number of 
beautiful houses comparing with great celestial cars. 



3® 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




*34 



RlMlYANA. 



SECTION XVI. 



Sumantra, well versed in legends, after passing by the gate- 
ways crowded with people, reached the solitary apartment 
(of RSima), having youthful warders, carrying darts and hows 
wearing ear-rings, cautious, attentive and devoted, and saw 
(seated at the gate) several old men, commanding female 
warders, mindful of duty, wearing red cloths and excellent 
ornaments, and having rattans in their hands. They all seeing 
Sumantra, ever wishing good unto R&ma, approach, rose sud- 
denly up from their seats with due respect. The humble- 
minded charioteer then said to them : — “Go and speedily com- 
municate unto R£ma that Sumantra is waiting at the gate/* 
At this the warders, desirous of doing good unto their 
master, nearing R&ma, speedily comunicated these words 
unto him who was in the company of his wife. R£ma hearing 
of the arrival of his father's charioteer, ordered him to enter 
into the apartment, having his father's pleasure in view. He 
(on entering) saw R5ma resembling Vaisravana, well adorned 
and seated on a gold sofa, with a beautiful coverlet on ; 
having his body sprinkled with holy and fragrant sandal 
of the best kind, red as the blood of a hog ; and having by 
him Slid with a chowri in her hand, like Moon himself in the 
company of Chitrd. 

Whereupon Sumantra, acquainted with decorum, humbly 
saluted him (RSma), the conferrer of great boons, and res- 
plendent like the mid-day sun ; and he well honored by 
the king, seeing the king's son seated on the sleeping sofa 
with a delighted countenance, spoke these words unto him 
with clasped hands : — “Oh, Rdma, great son of Kau^alyd, 
thy father and the queen Kaikeyi want to see thee ; so it be- 
hoveth thee to go there without delay. 11 Being pleased with 
these words the mighty hero of great effulgence, honored his 
father's behest and spoke unto SiU thus,— “Ob, darliog,doubt 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYlKlNDAM . 



ns 

there Is none that my father, going to Kaikeyi,is parleying with 
her regarding my installation. Concieving the king's intention 
that clever Iady,of dark eyes and desirous of doing good unto 
the king, that mother, the daughter of the king of Kekaya, 
pleased and intent upon king’s welfare as well as upon that of 
mine, is hastening the monarch for my installation. Fortun- 
ately for me, the monarch in the company of his Queen has 
despatched Sumantra, intent upon my welfare. Worthy of 
the meeting at the inner apartment, the messenger has come, 
and I doubt not that the monarch shall install me to-day as 
the heir-apparent of his throne. Therefore I shall speedily 
go hence and see my father. Do thou remain and enjoy here 
the company of thy friends.” 

Regarded by her husband, Sita, of dark eyes and 
intent upon her husband’s welfare, followed him to the 
entrance and said : — ‘‘May the great monarch bestow 
upon thee first the heir-apparentship, and afterwards 
the dignity of the Paramount power like Brahma grant, 
ing kingdom unto Vdsava. I shall be ministering unto 
thee, seeing thee initiated, engaged in ceremonies, wearing 
excellent deer skin for cloth and carrying horns in the 
hands. May Indra protect thee on the East, may YSma 
{Death) protect thee on the South, and Vanina (God of 
water) on the West and Kuvera (God of wealth) on the 
North.” Being greeted with benedictory ceremonies, Rama, 
bidding farewell to Sitd, issued out of his house like unto a 
lion, living in the den of a mountain. He saw Lakshmana 
standing at the gate with clasped hands, and met all his 
friends assembled at the middle apartment. Then that great 
son of the king, casting a glance upon them all who were 
present there to see him and pleasing them with sweet words 
ascended, like unto the thousand-eyed Indra, the splendid 
chariot, made of silver and coated with tiger-skin, and 
bright like the fire itself, making a noise (when going) like the 
roaring of clouds j defying all obstacles, adoraed with jewels. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




^ALlrAXA 



- — *r~:r t"i3 .vorshipfui one accompany 
-anr maws ? Do thou pennit me 
-m ; rest end perform benedictory 
cr . car i^am return home like unto 
r* mn, * cannot neglect eminent 
^ cr-er :*r dngdom alone. Life is 
-ursnrnrui me. and as such I do 
; ■ ?ca- rarm means unrighteous/' 
•re. ’_n * -:«*v to range into the 
*.r - 'rnmuacag ns mother and 

-r -ricer :e mysteries of rig b tea- 

..n Tverenc* and nude up 



. n tt si with patience 

. - x - r son of Sumitrl, 
, . r~r»i-y sorry, had lost 
4 , - « _r this misfortune of 
.. - ^r^rr like unto an in- 
^ c:- ar^er and sorrow, 

c~t»c^:ng the insult and 
^ ^ --'Tse things that have 

r ard make preparations 
-r^c. Oh son of Sumitri, 
«ar preventing now the 

as didst thou Uke 

“\r tbos act therefore in 
Iirr - s ben»on from the mind 
^ at heart so greatly 



Digitized by 



Google 



A YODHi v ^KlNDAM. 



*57 



on hearing of my installation^ xx * 1 * • 
cannot neglect for a moment the tr<X~ 

her mind on account of this fear. 1 oLakshmana, the mighty 
done on any occasion wilfully or \luctance, pondered for 
that is displeasing onto my father or moioy and grief, with 
of truthful words and vows and he has beeN^ob hot and hard, 
by the fear of the next world ; may his fear to another. 
If this work of installation be not stopped, myS^ns, which 
be greatly pained at heart thinking that his vows^emities 
be fulfilled and his sorrow will also ache me. And it ttously 
this reason, Oh Lakshmana, that I purpose speedily to reu a 
from this city to the forest, renouncing the preparations for 
my installation. On my wandering away unto the forest 
to-day, the daughter of Kekaya shall have her ends attained 
and shall install Bharata on the throne without any distur- 
bance whatsoever. Myself going to the forest, wearing bark, 
tiger-skin and matted hair, Kaikeyi shall attain the happiness 
of her mind. That great One, who has inspired Kaikeyi with 
this mode of mind and has kept it firm, I cannot offend. I 
shall repair hence without any delay. Do thou regard, Oh 
Lakshmana, Destiny as the only cause of this transfer of the 
kingdom, although attained, and of my banishment. Had not 
Destiny been instrumental in bringing about this determina- 
tion in Kaikeyi, she would not have been so much persever- 
ing in the infliction of misery upon me. Knowest thou, Oh 
gentle Lakshmana, that 1 have never made any distinction in 
my mind between my mothers, nor did Kaikeyi make any 
such thing before between me and her son ; consequently it 
is Destiny only that has made her press for the prevention of 
my installation and for my exile with harsh and cruel words, 
or else why should she, a daughter of a king and possessed 
of an excellent temper and high accomplishments, speak 
painful words unto me in the presence of her husband like 
unto an ordinary woman. That which is above comprehen- 
sion is Destiny and it is beyond the power of creatures to 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



* 3 6 



Rl Ally AN A 



and gold, dazzling the eye-sight and bright like the golden 
peaks of Sumeru, It had two excellent horses tied to it like 
unto two young elephants, and was of quick motion, resem- 
bling that of Indra’s chariot carried by his horses. Ascending the 
car, RSghava, of great effulgence, went speedily on, making 
(the space)resounded like unto the muttering cloud on the sky. 
He issued out of his abode like the beautiful moon passing 
through a huge cloud. And Lakshmana, the younger brother 
of Rlghava, standing behind him on the car with a splendid 
Chowri in his hand, began to guard his body. And there was 
caused a great tumult by the crowd gathering around on the 
issuing out of Rama. Then followed in his train many 
hundreds and thousands of beautiful horses and elephants 
resembling hills iu their appearance $ and went before him 
hundreds of heroes, well accoutered, and having their bodies 
sprinkled with sandal and Aguru and holding swords and 
arms in their hands, and other persons uttering 
benedictions. He heard on the way sounds of musical 
instruments, eulogy of the panegyrists and lion-like roars 
of the heroes. Exquisitely beautiful damsels, adorned with 
various ornaments and dresses, standing by the windows 
began to shower flowers upon the head of the foe-destroyer 
Rama, and those spotless beauties with a view to please 
Rirna, some standing on the buildings and some on the ground 
began to praise him : — “Oh thou, delight of thy mother, 
surely has mother Kau$alya become exceedingly gratified, on 
seeing thee of successful journey to accept the heir- 
apparentship of the throne.” Those ladies thought that 
SitS, the captivater of Rama’s heart was surely the best 
of all women and for certain had she performed some great 
austerities in her past life or else she would not have been 
the companion of Rama, like unto Rohini, the companion of 
Moon. That best among men heard these pleasant words 
from those ladies standing on the buildings and on high-ways. 
Raghava then heard the people coming from different quar- 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYlKlNDAM . 



*37 



ters and the well-pleased citizens, talking amongst themselves 
regarding him in the following strain. "This RSghava going 
shall obtain through the grace of the king great wealth, and 
all our desires will be gratified when he will become our gover- 
nor. It is a great gain to the subjects that he is going to get 
for ever the entire empire at once ; he being the lord of the 
people, no body shall witness any misfortune or unpleasant 
thing." Like unto Vaisravana he began to proceed, being 
dignified by the horses and elephants going before sending 
forth great sound, and eulogised in various metres by persons 
singing his glory, by the panegyrists and by men tracing his 
noble ancestry. He saw the courtyard thronged with young 
and old elephants, horses, chariots, and the high-ways 
crowded all over with people, many pearls and various mer- 
chandises. 



SECTION XVII. 

> ■ 9 i < 

JK/AMA, having his friends delighted, ascending the car, 
and viewing the city adorned with pennons and flags and 
incensed with Dhupa and Aguru , entered the high way, 
crowded with people and containing houses coloured as the 
pale white clouds, and the place between the two rows 
whereof scented with Dhupa and Aguru . It was a splendidly 
spacious '.road decorated with a collection of sandal, Aguru 
and other fine scents, with silk and red cloth, with pearls 
holed and other valuable crystals and strewn with various 
flowers and filled with edibles multiform. Like unto the 
lord of celestials in heaven he saw this high way and the 
court-yard covered with curd, clarified butter, fried paddy, 
Dhupa } Aguru and sandal, and embellished with garlands 
and other scents. Having heard benedictions uttered by 
many in the following strain and paying proper respects 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




238 



RXMlVANA. 



unto all, he wended his way. “Being installed this day do 
thou following in the footsteps of thy father and grand-fathers 
cherish and protect us. Thou taking the reins of government 
we shall live more happily than what we were under your 
ancestors. Seek not we earthly comforts or the highest things 
(in the life to come), if we can only see R3ma installed in the 
kingdom issuing out from his father's abode. There is nothing 
more pleasant to us than the installation of the highly 
energetic Raima on the throne." Raima, hearing these and 
other auspicious words from his friends eulogising his own 
self, went on his way without being moved. RSlghava passed 
away, but not a single person could withdraw his eyes and 
mind from that best of men. In fact he who did not see 
RSma, and whom R&ma did not see, was looked down by all* 
and he considered himself contemptible. That righteous one 
showed mercy unto all, old and young, of the four castes, 
and hence, tbiy were all obedient to him. He proceeded 
leaving on his left side the junctions of four roads, the paths 
leading to temples, the religious fig trees and altars, and 
reached after all the family dwelling of the king, with its 
palatial tops piercing the sky, looking beautiful, resembling 
mass of clouds, white as the celestial cars and high as the hill 
Kail&^a, and with sporting houses adorned with pearls. And 
the soti of the monarch, shining in beauty, entered into the 
palace of his father, the best on earth resembling the abode 
of Mahendra. Da 9 aratha's son, the best of men, crossed in 
his chariot three apartments guarded by warriors with bows in 
their hands, and other two on foot, and in this way passing 
by all, and ordering his followers to go back, entered the inner 
apartment. That son of the king entering into the presence 
of his father, all were extremely gladdened and were eagerly 
expecting his return like unto the lord of water expecting 
the appearance of the moon. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



AYODHYlKkNDAM. 



*39 



8ECTI0N XVII . 

Kama saw his father, seated on a beautiful sofa with 
Kaikeyi, looking sorry and poorly and with his countenance 
dried up. And humbly bowing down at the feet of his father 
first, he saluted Kaikeyi with due solemnity. Uttering 
the word “R2Lma” only, the poor king with his eyes full of 
tears could not eye him nor could he speak to him. Seeing 
this unforeseen and terrible appearance of the king, like unto a 
serpent trampled under foot, R&ma was exceedingly terrified. 
He was dejected and pulled down much with sorrow and 
penitence. He was sighing hot and hard and his heart was 
greatly pained. His heart was troubled like the wavy ocean 
agitating though incapable of agitation, and clouded like the Sun 
possessed by R&hu,and (that of) an ascetic speaking falsehood. 
Thinking of this untbought of sorrow of the king he became 
agitated like unto the ocean during the course of the full-moon. 
And clever Rlma, intent on his father's welfare, thought 
within himself ' “Why does not the king display joy on 
my arrival to-day ? Angry though, he used to express joy 
wh e never he saw me 5 then why does his sorrow prevail 
even seeing me to-day ?'* Being pressed with sorrow, R&ma 
erf pale countenance, like one miserable, saluting Kaikeyi, 
spoke unto her the following words. “Is it not that I com- 
mitted some offence through ignorance that I see my father 
angry ? Do thou propitiate him therefore. Why is bis 
mind so aggrieved who was so kind to me, and why does he 
look poorly and of pale countenance who used to welcome me 
always with kind words ? Is he subject to any physical or 
mental disturbance ? Oh ! happiness uninterrupted is 
very dear. Has any evil befallen the good-looking Bharata or 
high souled Satrughana ? Is it not all well with my mothers f 
Dissatisfying the king, disregarding bis words and offending 
him, I do not want to breathe for a single moment. How 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




>40 



RAAflrANA. 



can a man disregard him who is god himself seen and felt, 
and who is looked upon as a cause from whom he has sprung. 
Oh mother, hast thou spoken any harsh word to my father 
either through anger or through haughtiness for which 
his mind is thus pulled down ? Oh worshipful one, tell 
me all this, who am exceedingly anxious to get at the 
real truth. Why has this unforeseen sorrow overtaken the 
heart of the lord of men ?” 

Being thus addressed by the high-souled R&ghava, that 
exceedingly shameless Kaikeyi spoke unto him the following 
impudent words, fraught with her self-interest.“Oh R&ma, the 
monarch is not angry nor has any danger befallen him. He has 
got something in his mind which he cannot speak out through 
thy fear. Thou art his most beloved son and word does not 
proceed from his mouth to speak thee things unpleasant. But 
it behoveth thee to carry out what the monarch has promised 
unto me. Formerly regarding me very highly he conferred 
on me two boons and he now repents for that like a common 
person. Promising *1 give thee* the lord of earth granted 
me these boons ; in vain he wishes to set up a dyke when all 
the water has passed away. Oh R&ma, it is known to thee 
that truth is the root of all religion and may he not renounce 
that for thee, being angry with me. If do thou carry out all 
that the king will speak to thee, good or evil, then I shall 
relate unto thee every thing. If what I, with the king’s 
permission, speak to thee, does not go useless, I shall speak 
unto the all ; thee king will not speak any thing. 

Hearing these words uttered by Kaikeyi, R&ma, pained 
at heart, spoke unto her in the presence of the king iu 
the following way : — “Oh ! shame to me. May it not please 
thee, Oh worshipful lady, to speak such words to me. 
I can at the king’s words jump into the fire. Being 
ordered by him, who is my father and who is my king especi- 
ally, I can drink virulent poison and drown into the ocean. 
Speak thou, Oh worshipful lady, what is the desire of th^ 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A YODHYlKlNDAM . 



241 



king, and know that I shall carry it out— Rlma does not 
contradict what he has once spoken.” Then that wicked 
Kaikeyi spoke these highly cruel words unto R&ma, simple 
and truthful. “Formerly in a great war between the gods and 
Asuras, thy father, being wounded with shafts was tended 
by me for which he conferred upon me two boons. Of these 
two boons I have asked of the king the installation of Bharata, 
and the departure of R&ghava into the Dandaka forest 
even this very day. Oh thou, best among men, if do thou 
wish to keep thy father’s vows as well as thine, hear what 
I say. Thy father is bound unto me by promise, obeying 
therefore thy father’s mandate, do thou repair unto the forest 
for nine years and five. Bharata shall be installed, Oh 
R&ghava, by all those articles which have been brought by 
the monarch for thy installation. Forsaking this installation, 
do thou repair unto Dandaka forest for seven and seven 
years and wear bark and matted hair. And here in this 
Ko^ala let Bharata govern the world, adorned with many 
pearls and diamonds, with elephants, horses and chariots. 
The king, filled with pity and having his face marked with 
the affliction of sorrow, cannot cast a glance upon thee. 
Oh thou descendant of Raghu, do thou carry out these words 
of the Lord of men and save him by redeeming these great 
vows of his.” Hearing these cruel words of her, R&ma 
was not grieved ; but the generous king afflicted with the 
thought of the approaching separation with his son, was 
greatly pained. 



SECTION XIX. 

— j 9 rnz 

H earing these unpleasant words like unto death, Rama, 
the destroyer of foes, was not pained, and spoke thus unto 
Kaikeyi. “Be it what thou sayst ; carrying out the promise 
of the king, I shall repair unto the forest from this place 

3i 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




* 4 * 



RlMlFANA. 



wearing bark and malted hair. Now I want to know only 
why that lord of the earth, invincible and the conqueror of 
foes, does not receive me in the same way as he u 9 edtodoon 
previous occasions. Be not angry, Oh worshipful one, I speak 
before thee, be thou propitiated well, and I shall go to the 
forest wearing bark and matted hair. What is there that 1 
cannot perform, considering it good without suspicion, if 1 
am ordered so by my well-wisher, spiritual leader, father and 
king, who acknowledges thy service (rendered in time of 
danger*). But this one sorrow burns my heart, why king 
did not tell me personally of the installation of Bharata. 
What of the command of the king, my father, I shall even at 
thy mandate joyfully make over unto Bharata, my kingdom, 
Sita, wealth and even my life, thereby satisfying thee, and 
fulfilling my promise. Do thou now console the bashful 
king ; why has he, with bis eyes steadily fixed on the ground, 
been shedding tears slowly ? Let messengers, with fast 
going steeds go to-day at the command of the king to 
fetch Bharata from his maternal uncle’s house. And I 
shall, not even judging the propriety of my father’s 
words, speedily repair unto the forest of Dandaka for 
fourteen years.” Hearing those words of R&ma, Kaikeyi 
was pleased, and being certain about his departure, 
hurried on RSghava. “Let it be that messengers with fast 
going steeds shall go to bring Bharata from his maternal 
uncle’s residence. I do not think it proper for thee, O Rima, 
to delay, when thou art so anxious ; it behoves thee therefore 
to depart from this place speedily unto the forest. The king 
being abashed, does not himself address thee, there is 
nothing else than this. Do thou, Oh best of men, dispel this 
wretchedness of his. As long as thou sha It not hurriedly 



• The epithet Kritajncna may as well be rendered into general terms , 
such as 'who acknowledges services redered onto him.' Here in translation l 
have foil wed the commentator who has restricted it to the special sense suitable 
to the occasion. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHrlKlNDAM . 343 

depart frotrt his presence, Oh Rima. thy father shall not 
bathe, or eat anything/' ‘Oh fie f ‘what affliction' sobbing 
hard with these words, the monarch, filled with sorrow, swoon- 
ed away and fell down upon the sofa, embellished with gold. 
Raising the king up, R5ma, being directed by Kaikeyi, 
began to hurry on his departure to the forest, like unto a 
steed struck sharp with a whip. Hearing those cruel and 
unpleasant words of the wicked Kaikeyi, Rama, not being 
distressed, began to address her with the following words. 
“Oh worshipful one, being addicted to wealth do I not long 
for living in this world ; like unto Rishis, know me, to be well 
established in pure religion. If I can, even at the sacrifice 
of my own life, satisfy my worshipful father rest assured it is 
to be done first in all manner. There is no virtue greater 
than, the serving of the father and carrying out his words^ 
Even though not commanded by him, I shall, for thy words, 
live in a solitary forest for fourteen years. Oh Kaikeyi, 
certain it is that thou art not acquainted with my foremost 
virtues, inasmuch as possessing full authority to rule me, thou 
hast requested the monarch for this. Excuse me until I ask 
my mother, and comfort SitSL ; even this very day shall I wend 
my way unto the great forest of Dandaka. It behoves thee to 
do that by which Bharata may govern the kingdom and tend 
our father, for this is the virtue eternal. 1 ' Hearing these 
words of Rama, his father, greatly afflicted and incapable of 
speaking anything on account of sorrow, began to cry 
aloud. Worshipping the feet of the king lying insensible, 
^nd those of vicious Kaikeyi, that greatly effulgent one went 
out. And reverentially going round his father and Kaikeyi, 
and issuing out of the female apartment, Rama saw his own 
friends and relatives. Then followed him Lakshmana, the 
enhancer of Sumitrl's joy, greatly angry and with his eyes 
full of tears. Going round with reverence the house of 
instalation full of necessary articles, not turning away from 
it his wistful look, Rama began to proceed slowly. Loss of 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




244 rXmXyana 

kingdom could not diminish the great beauty of that beloved 
of the people on account of its everlasting pleasantness, like 
unto the wane of the moon. There was manifest in him no 
change of mind, who was about to fly as an exile to the forest 
and leave the world, like unto one emancipated while yet 
living. Leaving aside the excellent umbrella and well adorned 
chowrtes , forsaking his relatives, chariot, citizens and other 
people, calmly bearing the affliction in mind and not mani- 
festing the outward signs of sorrow, R&ma, with a view to 
communicate this unpleasant news to his mother, entered her 
abode. All persons, who were present there and who adorned 
themselves on account of the installation, did not percieve 
any sign of mental agony on the face of Rama. Like unto 
the rays of the fully brilliant autumnal moon, that hero of 
mighty arms, having control over himself, did not forsake his 
native cheerfulness. The pious R&ma, having high fame, 
entereJ into the presence of his mother, manifesting great 
regards for the people with sweet speech. Then followed 
him, the son of Sumitra, of mighty prowess, of equal accom- 
plishments with his brother, and bearing the mental sorrow. 
Raima, entering the abode of his mother, saw it filled with 
all sorts of amusements ; and even though his mind was not 
agitated with any mental disturbance seeing the impending 
calamity of loss of wealth, he was anxious lest the lives of his 
dear relatives might be in danger. 



SECTION XX. 

— : 00 :— 

Thbre arose a great uproar of cry in the apartment of 
the females, when that best of men went out with clasped 
bands. “That Rama, who used to serve all the females in 
all matters even without his father’s permission, who was 
our stay and protector, is going to the forest. Rftghava from 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A YODHYlKlNDAM . 



MS 



his birth pays as much attention to us as to his mother 
KaugalyS. He, who being cursed, does not get angry, 
pacifies the wrathful and studiously avoids words and deeds 
that excite anger in others, will repair hence this day unto 
the forest. Senseless is our king, who forsakes RSghava who 
is the stay of all people, and thus kills his subjects .’ 9 Thus 
the queens of Da^aratha, like unto the cows that have lost 
their young ones, began to blame him and cry aloud. Hear- 
ing this terrible uproar of cry in the female apartment, that 
lord of earth, racked with sorrow on account of his son, hid 
himself in the seat (with head hanging downdards). Rlma 
too, having control over his own self, experiencing sorrow 
(for his relatives) and sobbing like an (enchained) elephant, 
entered into his mother’s apartment together with his brother. 
He saw a venerable old man, sitting at the gate and many 
other persons. All those present, seeing RSma, began to 
shower benedictions on him, the best of all victorious heroes, 
saying, ’‘Victory unto thee.” Having passed through the first 
apartment he saw in the second, many old Brahmins, versed 
in the Vedas and honored by the king. Having bowed down 
unto them, RSma saw in the third apartment, women, boys, 
and old men, all engaged in watching the gate. The female 
warders honored Ram& rejoicing, and entering his mother’s 
apartment, communicated unto her speedily this pleasant 
news. Worshipful Kaucalya, seeking her son’s welfare, 
kept up the whole night being absorbed in meditation, and 
was, in the morning, worshipping the God Vishnu. Wearing 
silk-cloth, pleased, and accustomed to the performance 
of religious rites every day, she, performing benedictory cere- 
monies, was offering oblation unto the fire. RSLma entering 
the auspicious abode of his mother beheld her thus engaged 
in the sacrifice to the fire. The descendant of Raghu saw 
there, brought for the service of the celestials, curd, grains, 
clarified butter, sweetmeats, things fit for oblations unto the 
fire, fried paddy, white garlands, rice boiled in milk and sugar, 



Digitized by 



Google 







146 



R A Mir ANA. 



rice sesafr.um and pea mixtures, sacrficial fuels and jars 
full of water. He saw his virtuous mother wearing white 
silk, pulled down by the austere performance of religious 
rites, and engaged in propitiating the deities with 
the offering of water. She seeing her son, ever ad 
vancing the joy of his mother, approach, became pleased, 
and stepped forward like unto a mare beholding 

her young one. Seeing his mother approach, Rlghava 
bowed low, and (Kaucalya) embracing him in her arms smelt 
his head. Kau9alya, out of motherly affection, spoke these 
sweet and beneficient words unto her own invincible son, 
RSghava. “Mayst thou obtain the life and fame of the pious, 
old Rajarshts , and the virtue worthy of thy family. See, Oh 
RSghava, how truthful is your father the king ! That virtuous- 
souled one shall install thee this day as the heir-apparent of 
the throne. ,, Raghava, humble by nature, who was offered by 
his mother a seat and asked by her to eat something, strech- 
ing forth a little his clasped hands, and with his head down- 
wards with a view to show respects towards his mother, 
touched the seat, and began to relate unto her the object of 
his repairing unto the Dandaka forest. “O worshipful one, cer- 
tain it is that thou knowest not the great impending calamity. 

It is for the distress of thine, Lakshmana and Vaidehi, that shall 
I wend my way unto the Dandaka forest. What is the use of 
a seat to me then ? Now is the time come when I deserve a seat 
made of Kusa grass. I shall live in the forest for fourteen years 
abstaining from animal food and living on tuberous roots and 
fruits like unto the ascetics. The king shall confer upon 
Bharata the heir-apparentship and shall banish me as an ascetic 
into the forest. And I shall live in that solitary forest for 
eight and six years, feasting on roots, and fruits and perform- 
ing the duties of a hermit.” Like unto the stem of a sala tree 
cut asunder by an axe in a wood, like unto a female celestial „ 
fallen down from the abode of the gods, she fell down sud- 
denly (hearing these heart-rending words.) R&ma seeing his 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHYlKlNDAM . 



*47 



mother, who deserved no distress, fall down like a plantain 
tree and insensible, raised her up, and finding her covered 
with dust all over her body like unto a mare risen up after rol 
ling on the ground on account of toil of bearing heavy burden 
wiped off (her body) gently with his hand. She, deserving 
happiness, being racked with the destruction of her delight 
spoke thus unto Raghava, that best of men, in the presence 
of Lakshmana. “Oh J my son, Oh ! Raghava, hadst thou 
not been born for my grief I would have been sonless only, 
but would not have been subject to this greater grief. A 
sonless woman has only one cause of mental affliction. Her 
only sorrow is “I have no child” and nothing else my son. 
I have not experienced in my life that blessing and pleasure 
which women generally feel when their husbands are devoted 
to them. I have sustained my life so long, O Rama, only 
with the hope that I shall witness this and other happiness 
when I shall have a son. Myself, being the eldest of all the 
queens, shall have to hear unpleasant and heart-rending 
words from the co-wives who are all younger than I. There 
can be no greater misery for women than this my boundless 
grief and lamentations. Thou being present, they have 
reduced me to this miserable plight, I do not know what else 
they will do, thou being away ; there is death certain for me. 
Oh my darling ! Being disregarded by my husband I have 
been greatly insulted — 1 am equal to the maid-servants of 
Kaikeyi or even inferior to them. Those who serve me or 
are obedient unto me, shall not even speak with me when 
they will see the son of Kaikeyi (installed). She is always 
of fretful temper, how shall I, reduced to misery (on account 
of thy exile), eye the face of Kaikeyi, uttering harsh words. 
I have spent, Oh R&ghava, ten years and seven from thy 
(second) birth* expecting a termination of my sorrow. Even 

* Here the commentators differ in fixing the age of Rama at the time of 
his goiog to the forest. Rama’s age was under sixteen at the time of 
marriage, and after he was married to Sica he enjoyed her company for twelve 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




*48 



RlMlVANA . 



though worn out, Oh R&ghava, I shall not be able to suffer 
this great misery cosequent upon thy unending exile and 
the contempt of the co-wives. How shall I, of miserable life 
pass my days in grief not seeing thy face, effulgent like unto 
the full-moon. Wretched as 1 am, in vain have 1 brought thee 
up with fasts, contemplations and many other toilsome aus- 
terities. Surely, I consider my heart is very hard, as it does 
not rend like unto the bank of a great river in contact with 
new water in the rainy season. There is no death for me— 
no vacant place in the abode of Yama $ otherwise why does 
not Death take me away like unto a lion snatching away a 
weeping hind ; certain it is that my heart is made of iron, as 
it does not rend nor does my body being pressed down with 
this sorrow and 'falling) down on earth, break into pieces ; 
verily have I no death before time. This distresses me that 
all my religious vows, alms givings, self-restraint and austerity, 
performed with a view of obtaining a son, have been fruitless, 
like unto the seeds thrown on a barren soil. If any body in 
this life, being pressed down with some great calamity, could 
meet with death of his own accord, I would have instantly 



years, when the proposal of installation was made. This makes totally an age 
of twenty-seven. In the text 'dasa saptacha' (ten and seven) ten years fall 
short which are to be made up by taking into account the age of ten being left 
out, preceding Rama’s entering into the second birth which begins at maunji- 
bandhana or initiation into the mysteries of the Vedic literature. Following the 
example of Bhashyakara Patanjali, the commentator, Ramanuju has in tbe 
sentence ‘dasa saptacha’ supplied another (dasa) (ten) by means of ellipsis t thus 
giving an age of twenty-seven. This, however, contradicts the statement of 
Sita to R&vana in guise of an anchorite, informing him of the age of her hus- 
band being twent-five. A modern annotator with great ingenuity has devised 
ways to make up this discrepancy. The age of R&ma was under sixteen, 
when Visvamitra asked his assistance in destroying Tdrakd. ‘Under sixteen* 
may mean fifteen or twelve as well. After marriage at twelve, Rima enjoyed 
twelve years more the pleasure of home. This giving in total twenty-four, it is 
to be supposed that when he was exiled he stepped at twenty-five. The text 
'dasa saptachct is correct, considering the age of eight being left out preceding 
his second birth at the initiation into the mysteries of the Veda. 



Digitized by 



Google 



A YODHYlKlNDA M. 249 

gone to the abode of dealh, being cut off from thee like unto 
a cow from her young one. Oh, thou, having a countenance 
of moon-like splendour, wretched indeed is my life without 
thee — I shall follow thee to the forest out of great affec- 
tion, like unto an enfeebled cow following her young one. 
Kau£alya like a Kinnari unable to bear this great calamity, 
anticipating some great misfortune and seeing R&ma bound 
(with a great vow), began to lament in various ways. 



SECTION XXI. 



.A. T this time Lakshmana, sorely distressed, addressed the 
weeping Kau^alya, the mother of Rima with the following 
words suitable to that occasion. *‘I like it not, Oh worshipful 
one, that RSLghava, should repair unto the forest, renouncing 
this grandeur of sovereignty. The king is uxorious, old 
and therefore of perverted judgment and is addicted to world- 
ly affairs $ being under the influence of his wife and passion 
what could he not speak ? I do not see any such fault or 
sin in R&ma that he should be banished from the kingdom 
to range in the wood. I do not find any such man in this 
world, even amongst great enemies, who, forsaken for 
heinous sins, can cite, even in his absence, any fault of him. 
Observing what law of righteousness does the monarch, with- 
out any cause, renounce such a son who is like unto celestials, 
simple, well disciplined and beloved even of the enemies ? 
What son, remembering his father's conduct, shall carry in 
his heart these words of the king, who has again gone back 
to childhood ? Ere people come to know this proposal of 
exile, do thou secure the government of the kingdom unto 
thyself with me. Who can disturb the installation, Oh 
R&ghava, myself protecting thee by thy side with my bows, 
like unto Death himself. If any body stauds here as an 
enemy, surely shall I, Oh best of men, depopulate the whole 

3 2 



Digitized by Google 




250 



RlMlTANA . 



city of Ayodhya with sharp arrows. I shall immolate all who 
shall stand by Bharata or wish him well — certainly mildness 
brings about discomfiture. If father being propitiated and 
excited by Kaikeyi, turns out to be our enemy, he shall be 
slain, without any hestitation. Even a spiritual leader deserves 
chastisement if he is puffed up with pride, and is devoid of 
the power of judging good actions and bad, and when he is 
gone astray. Tell me, Oh best of men, by what law of virtue 
and what reason does he purpose to confer this kingdom upon 
Kaikeyi, which has devolved upon thee (by the law of inhe- 
ritance). Who dares conferring on Bharata the kingdom, 
carrying hostility with me and thee ? Oh worshipful 
one, verily am I attached at heart to my brother. By 
truth, bow, gifts and things dear unto me, do I swear unto 
thee ; if Rama shall enter into the wood, know me, Oh 
worshipful one, to have entered into the fire before that. 
Like unto the sun dispelling darkness, shall I remove thy 
sorrow by dint of my power ; may your worshipful self and 
R&ghava witness it. Readily shall I despatch my father, 
whose heart is unduly attached unto Kaikeyi and who is 
therefore vile and being old contemptibly playing the child.” 
Hearing these words of the high*souled Lakshmana, Kau9alya 
weeping and being pressed with sorrow spoke these words unto 
R&ma. “You have heard, Oh my son, what your brother 
Lakshmana said ; and if you like, do what seems reason- 
able unto thee. It does not behove thee, hearing the 
sinful words given vent to by the co-wife, to repair hence, 
leaving me who is sore distressed with sorrow. Oh thou 
pious one, having knowledge of religion, if do thou wish to 
acquire righteousness, serve me here and continue practising 
the best of all virtues. Hear, Oh my son, the great ascetic 
Kasyapa, lived in his house, serving his mother continually 
and being crowned with best moral merit reached heaven. 
As the monarch is worshipful unto thee in veneration so 
am I. I do not permit thee, to repair hence unto the forest. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A YODHYlKXNDAM. 



* 5 * 



Separated from thee I do not need life or happiness ; with 
thee I would prefer faring on grass. If do thou depart unto 
the forest leaving me troubled with sorrow, I shall resort to 
the vow of fasting and shall not Ue able to sustain my life. 
And then thou shalt receive the penalty of hell, well known 
to the people, as did the ocean, the lord of rivers, for like, 
unrighteousness, suffer the agony of Brahminicide."* Where- 
upon unto his mother Kau^alya, sorrowful and weeping, spoke 
R&ma, virtuous-souled, these words of righteousness. “There 
is no power in me to transgress my father’s behests j bend 
low I my head unto thee — I want to proceed to the forest. 
The learned Rishi Kandu, who lived in the forest keeping 
the word of his father, killed a cow, knowing it to be 
unrighteousness. In our line the descendants of S&gara, at 
the command of their father, met with signal destruction, 
while digging the earth. RSma the son of jSmadagni, at his 
father's words, decapitated his mother in the forest. These 
and other god-like personages, Oh worshipful one, obeyed 
heroically the orders of their father ; and I shall do my father's 
welfare therefore. It is not I alone who am carrying out my 
father's commands ; those whom I have mentioned now, O 
worshipful one, have done so. I am not introducing some 
such righteousness, unfavourable unto thee, that has been 
never practised before. I am simply treading the path, that 
has been upheld and followed by worthies gone before. 
Surely shall I accomplish that which is worthy of being 
performed in this world and nothing else— one going by his 
father's behests is not certainly degraded." 

Saying these words unto his mother, that best of men 
versed in speech and best of archers, again spoke unto 



* The text has been here a little freely translated to make it compatible 
with the legend to which it refers. The ocean, thus goes the story, caused the 
grief of his mother. Upon which, Maharshi Pippyalada, through magical 
power, subjected him to agony of hell. This agony the mother of Rama relate* 
as the same that follows the sin of Brahminicide. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RlMlYANA. 



*52 

Lakshmana all these words. “I know full well, Oh 
Lakshmana, thy affection towards me and thy power, 
strength and unconquerable force. Not knowing my settled 
conviction in regard to truth and peace, my mother, Oh 
beautiful Lakshmana, is so disturbed with incomparable 
sorrow. Righteousness is the prime object in this world and 
in righteousness is established truth, and this excellent 
utterance of my father is in keeping with ^righteousness. It 
does not become them, O hero, who abide in righteousness to 
fail to carry out the commands of father, mother or a Brahmin. 
While I have been, Oh warrior, ordered by Kaikeyi at my 
father’s words, I shall not be able to transgress those behests 
again. Do thou relinquish therefore this unrighteous purpose 
of thine consequent to the virtues of the Kshatriyas \ do thou 
abide by righteousness but not cruelty, and follow my deci- 
sion.” Saying these words unto Lakshmana out of fraternal 
affection, spoke again R&ma to Kau^alya with clasped hands 
and with his head bending low. “I do bind thee with an oath 
of my life, Oh venerab ] e one, to allow me to wander away hence 
into the wood. Do thou perform benedictory ceremonies for my 
welfare. Like unto the royal saint Yayati ’, in the days of yore 
once falling on earth going again to the abode of celestials, 
I shall, fulfilling my vows, again return home from the forest. 
Do thou. Oh mother, assuage thy grief within thy heart ; 
lament not thou, I shall return home again from the wood 
after making good my father’s words. Myself, Lakshmana, 
Vaidehi, Sumitr§. and thyself shall abide by father’s words, 
and this is the virtue eternal. Desisting from the ceremonies 
of installation and allaying thy sorrow in thy heart do thou, 
Oh my mother, follow my pious decision about retiring to the 
forest”. Hearing those pious, sober and reasonable words of 
Rama, the venerable mother, regaining her sense like unto 
the dead, and casting her look upon him, spoke to him again 
the following words. “I am equally worshipful unto thee. 
Oh my son, with your father, for like him have I brought thee 



Digitized by 



Google 



avodhyIkIndam . 



*53 



up wi;h pains and like him do I love thee. 1 shall not allow 
thee to repair unto the forest and it does not behove thee 
to go leaving me behind sore distresssd with grief. Without 
thee, of what avail to me is my life, my relatives, the worship 
of the manes and the deities and the knowledge of divine truth 
on this earth ? Prefer do I thy company even for a moment to 
the presence of all creation.” Hearing these sorrowful words 
of his mother, Rlma was again inflamed with ire, like unto an 
elephant goaded with a fire-brand, when entering into darkness. 
He, abiding in righteousness spoke such pious words unto his 
mother, almost insensible, and unto the son of SumitrS, be- 
wailing and racked with sorrow, as he was justified to utter 
on that occasion. “I know, Oh Lakshmana, thy deep res- 
pects unto me and thy power. It is not proper for thee to 
pain me along with my mother, not being cognizant of my 
intention. Righteousness, wealth, and the objects of desire 
are looked upon with great esteem in this world of the created 
but when the occasion for obtaining the result consequent 
upon the virtuous deeds of a prior life appears, all these three, 
I have no doubt, are fulfilled in righteousness, as the wife 
alone, obedient, charming and having a son (fulfils them all). 
It is not becoming for us to perform all those things where 
these three do not combine — whence results righteousness 
that we should resort to. A man seeking wealth becomes 
despicable, and one subject to desires is not admired by any 
(when bereft of righteousness). Who of us, having no ten- 
dency to wickedness, shall not obey the command of 
our father knowing it to be righteousness, who is old, our 
monarch and preceptor in military training, be it an outcome 
of his desires, anger or joy. For this it is that I am unable 
to act against my father's vow — he is our father and there- 
fore can command us both like a master ; and he is the 
husband of this venerable one, therefore her stay and right- 
eousness itself. The righteous monarch is still living and 
continues in his own path when ready to redeem his vow even 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




254 



rAmAvana 



by renouncing me — how can this Worshipful one accompany 
me like other insignificant widows ? Do thou permit me 
therefore, to repair unto the forest and perform benedictory 
ceremonies for me so that I may again return home like unto 
Yajati regaining heaven by truth. I cannot neglect eminent 
fame being impelled by avarice for kingdom alone. Life is 
but of short duration, Oh worshipful one, and as such I do 
not long for acquiring this nether earth by means unrighteous/' 
Rama, that foremost of men, with a view to range into the 
forest Dandaka after patiently propitiating his mother and 
instructing fqlly his younger brother the mysteries of righteo- 
usness, went round his mother with reverence and made up 
his mind to repair unto the forest. 



SECTION XXII. 



Hereafter holding the equanimity of mind with patience 
self-possessed Rama spoke thus unto the son of Sumitr&, 
his dear brother, and friend, who was greatly sorry, had lost 
his patience and was pressed down with this misfortune of 
R§ma, and had his eyes inflated with anger like unto an in- 
furiated elephant j — “Subduing this anger and sorrow, 
taking recourse to patience only, brooking the insult and 
resorting to joy, do thou set aside all those things that have 
been collected here for my installation and make preparations 
speedily for my repairing to the forest. Oh son of SumitrS, 
do thou take that amount of trouble for preventing now the 
collection of materials for installation, as didst thou take 
beforehand for collecting them. Do thou act therefore in 
such a way as will remove the apprehension from the mind 
of our mother (Kaikeyi), who is troubled at heart so greatly 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



V 

A YODH^KlNDAM. *57 

on hearing of my installation^ xx 1 1 * • 
cannot neglect for a moment the tree 

her mind on account of this fear. I i^akshmana, the mighty 
done on any occasion wilfully or\luctance, pondered for 
that is displeasing unto my father or moioy and grief, with 
of truthful words and vows and he has beeX^ob hot and hard, 
by the fear of the next world ; may his fear to another. 

If this work of installation be not stopped, myN^wns, which 
be greatly pained at heart thinking that his vowsS^emities 
be fulfilled and his sorrow will also ache me. And it n^usly 
this reason, Oh Lakshmana, that I purpose speedily to recn^o 
from this city to the forest, renouncing the preparations for^N 
my installation. On my wandering away unto the forest 
to-day, the daughter of Kekaya shall have her ends attained 
and shall install Bharata on the throne without any distur- 
bance whatsoever. Myself going to the forest, wearing bark, 
tiger-skin and matted hair, Kaikeyi shall attain the happiness 
of her mind. That great One, who has inspired Kaikeyi with 
this mode of mind and has kept it firm, I cannot offend. I 
shall repair hence without any delay. Do thou regard, Oh 
Lakshmana, Destiny as the only cause of this transfer of the 
kingdom, although attained, and of my banishment. Had not 
Destiny been instrumental in bringing about this determina- 
tion in Kaikeyi, she would not have been so much persever- 
ing in the infliction of misery upon me. Knowest thou, Oh 
gentle Lakshmana, that I have never made any distinction in 
my mind between my mothers, nor did Kaikeyi make any 
such thing before between me and her son ; consequently it 
is Destiny only that has made her press for the prevention of 
my installation and for my exile with harsh and cruel words, 
or else why should she, a daughter of a king and possessed 
of an excellent temper and high accomplishments, speak 
painful words unto me in the presence of her husband like 
unto an ordinary woman. That which is above comprehen- 
sion is Destiny and it is beyond the power of creatures to 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




rAajA r as ana. 



254 

by renouncing me — how can thd evidently it is through this 
me like other insignificantig up this distemper of Kaikeyi and 
therefore, to repair unto/hat man dares withstand Oh son of 
ceremonies for me so tfre) Destiny hidden from our view until 
Yajati regaining heavquences of action. Destiny is the prime 
fame being impelled inconceivable causes which occur with 
but of short djnappiness misery, fear, and anger, profit and 
not long for amd deliverance. Seers of great austerity being 
Rama, t> e( i hy this Destiny, succumb to the attack of anger 
forest desire, renouncing all their hard disciplines. The 
jp**nderance in this world to the completion of works taken in 
hand, and the origination of an unthought of event in its 
stead is nothing but the action of this Destiny. The mind 
brought under discipline. by this true rationale, there remains 
no cause of sorrow regarding my installation being put a stop 
to. Do thou therefore assuage thy grief and follow me and 
intercept speedily the collection of materials for my installa- 
tion. The bathing ceremony, necessary before taking the 
vows of asceticism, shall be performed, Oh Lakshmana, with 
all these jars full of water brought for my installation. Or 
what necessity have I with all these articles of installation ; 
water drawn from the well by myself shall do for entering 
into the vow of exile. Do thou not grieve. Oh Lakshmana, 

for this loss of kingdom. Of kingdom and exile into the 
forest, exile is' fraught with glorious results. Knowest thou 

now the mighty power of Destiny and do thou not blame 
therefore my younger mother and my father laboring under 
the influence of Destiny. 



Digitized by 



Google 



A YODHrlKlNDAM. 



*57 



SECTI ON XXII I. 

— > e — » 

JOEING addressed by RSma thus, Lakshmana, the mighty 
hero, hanging down his head with half reluctance, pondered for 
sometime, and, placed midway between joy and grief, with 
frown drawn in between his brows, began to sob hot and hard, 
like unto an angry serpent in a cave belonging to another. 
No body could eye his face, having terrible frowns, which 
looked like that of an angry lion. Moving the extremities 
of his hands like unto the trunk of an elephant, variously 
altering the altitude of the neck above his frame, glancing a 
look awry, thus spoke he unto his brother. “To avoid the 
transgression of righteousness, and the degradation of the 
people (consequent upon a bad example), thou art eager to 
repair unto the forest. This thy eagerness is certainly mis- 
placed. Wast not thou under error, how could one like thy- 
self, being heroic among the Kshatriyas, and capable of 
overcoming Destiny, speak in such a strain as behoves one 
that is impotent. Why dost thou extol Destiny which is 
powerless and weak. For what reason dost thou not appre- 
hend (unrighteousness) in those two (Da^aratha and Kaikeyi), 
addicted to vice. Dost thou not understand that there are 
many people who feign piety outwardly (to deceive the 
simple). With a desire to renounce thee by fraud, they simulate 
piety which is but selfishness. Had they not purposed 
thus, Oh, Righava, things would not have taken such a turn. 
If this story of the vows be true, then why had it not been 
declared before. Surely has the monarch engaged in an 
action hateful to the people, namely the installation of a 
younger brother neglecting thee (the eldest one). Pray, pardon 
me, Oh great hero, I cannot brook all this. Even that so called 
virtue do I loathe, which has, O high-souled one, fascinated 
thee, and made thy mind run from one extreme to another.* 

• Formerly the mind was for accepting the kingdom/and now for going to 
the forest as an exile. These are the two extremes here meant. — T. 

33 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RlMlVANA. 



* 5 $ 

Why shalt thou, being capable of work, conform these impious 
and cursed words of thy father, who is sadly under the influ- 
ence of Kaikeyi. Here lies my sorrow that thou dost not 
admit that this disturbance of the installation has arisen 
out of the pretext of boon giving ; thy idea of virtue is indeed 
an object of censure. People will mark this thy forsaking 
of the kingdom for redeeming the vows of thy father, with 
opprobrium. Who else, save thee, even thinks of compassing 
the desires of the monarch and the queen Kaikeyi, who are 
of unrestrained habits, ever intent on our mischief and are our 
enemies known by the name of parents. Even if their throwing 
obstacles in the way of thy installation thou considerest, as 
the inevitable action of Destiny — pray disregard it, that does 
not please me. He, who is tremulous, weak and powerless, 
follows the track of Destiny ; they pay no regard to it who 
are mighty heroes and whose prowess is held in esteem by 
the people. He, who can avert the consequences of Destiny 
by dint of his manliness, does not lose heart even in the face 
of his interest being endangered by it. People shall witness 
to-day the power of Destiny and manliness ; this day shall 
appear which of them is more powerful. Those who have 
witnessed before the prevention of thy installation by the evil 
agency of Destiny, shall see it defeated, even this very day, 
by my manliness. Thwart shall I that assailing Destiny by 
my prowess like unto a terrible elephant, freed of its shackles 
past the restraining power of a goading hook and inflamed 
with the juice issuing out of its temples. What of the 
father, not even all the protectors of the regions nor the 
entire population of the three worlds shall be able to 
piesent any obstacle in the way of Rama’s installation. Those 
who have, with one voice, Oh king, settled about thy exile 
unto the forest, shall be banished to day for fourteen years. 
Burn shall 1 down that hope of my father and Kaikeyi that 
they want to place Bharata on the throne by hindering thy 
installation. Influence of destiny shall not bring my oppo- 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



*59 



A YODHYlKlNDAM. 

nents that amount of happiness, as the misery inflicted on 
them by my terrible prowess. Thyself retiring unto the 
forest after governing the people for a thousand years, thy 
sons shall resume the administration. Dwelling into the 
forest is permitted after making over (the charge of the 
subjects unto (the hands of the) sons, as did the Rajarshis of 
old. The monarch changing his mind, the kingdom shall 
be transferred into another’s hands — dost thou, being afraid 
of this, want to fly as an exile unto the forest ? And is it ior 
this, that thou Oh virtuous souled R4ma, dost not wish to 
have kingdom for thee ? I do promise unto thee, Oh great 
hero, that I shall protect thy kingdom like unto shore pro- 
tecting the sea, or else 1 shall not attain to the region of 
heroes. Do thou perform the rites of installation with 
things necessary for benediction— do thou engage in these 
affairs— myself alone shall be able by force to thwart the 
opposition of the kings. These hands of mine are not in- 
tended for enhancing the beauty of my body — this bow is 
not meant for an ornament only, this sword is not for bind- 
ing woods together with, and these arrows are not for carrying 
the weight of woods — these four belonging to me are for 
the use of killing the enemies. Never do I desire that I 
shall not cut them into pieces with sharp edged swords, brilli- 
ant as the lightning, whom I do consider as my enemies, 
though they be redoutable as Indra, the wielder of thunder- 
bolt. Cover thick shall I the field of battle and make it 
impassable by cutting assunder the trunks of the elephants, 
thighs of the horses and heads of the infantry. Being be- 
headed by my swords like unto the flaming fire and bes- 
meared with blood resembling the clouds with lightning, 
my enemies shall fall down to the ground. Who is there, 
proud of his own prowess, that shall be able to withstand me 
when I shall appear at the battle field with bows and leathern 
fences of fingers. Killing one with a number of arrows, and 
sometimes many with a single one, I shall drive shafts into 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




2$0 



RlMXYANA. 



the vital organs of men, horses and elephants. To-day shal I 
display my skill in arms in destroying the supremacy of the 
monarch and establishing thine. That hand, which is fit for 
the smearing of the Sandal, for wearing armlets, distributing 
wealth and maintaining relations, shall be engaged to-day, 
Oh Rima, in performing its worthy action — the discomfiture 
of them who want to throw obstacles in the way of thy instal- 
lation. Pray tell me now, which of your enemies shall be 
cut off by me from wealth, life and relatives ? Iam thy 
servant : do thou give me instruction that the whole earth 
may be brought under thy subjection”. That descendant of 
Raghu, wiping tears off the eyes of Lakshmana and con- 
soling him repeatedly, spoke unto him saying “Oh gentle 
one, I have thought it to be the best way by all means that 
I shall abide by my father’s orders.” 



SECTION XXIV. 



^EEING Rama determined upon carrying out his father’s 
behests, Kau9aly3L with her voice choked with vapour begot 
of tears, spoke unto him the following pious words. 
“How shall this virtuous-souled one, beloved of people and 
who has never experienced misfortune before, live on grains 
gleaned, being born of me to Da9aratha ? How shall 
that RSma live upon fruits and roots, whose servants and 
attendants fare on well cooked rice ? Who shall believe, 
or believing who shall not be afraid, that this highly accom- 
plished descendant of Kakuthstha, favourite of the king, 
is going to be exiled ? Certainly Destiny, who crowns or 
afflicts people with happiness or misery, is the most power- 
ful agency in the world, or why shalt thou, Oh pleasing 
Rama, fly as an exile unto the forest ? This great and in- 
comparable fire of sorrow issuing from my mind, inflamed 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYlKlNDAM. 



zb I 

by the wind of thy absence, increased by the fuels of lamen- 
tation and pain, kindled by hard sobs, obtaining the oblations 
of tears, vomiting the smoke of vapour begotten of anxious 
% thoughts — the result of counting upon the days of thy return, 
shall consume me, making greatly lean, when deprived of 
thy presence, as does the fire burn the dry grass in summer. 
Like unto a cow following its young one shall I follow thee, 
Oh my darling, wherever shalt thou go." Hearing those 
words of his mother, R&ma that best of men, spoke the 
following words unto her, who was greatly troubled with 
sorrow. “The monarch has been duped by Kaikeyi ; myself 
resorting to the forest, surely shall he resign his life, if cast 
off again by thee. There is nothing more cruel for women 
than the forsaking of their husbands ; it does not behove thee 
therefore, to think even of this opprobrious action. Do thou 
serve this descendant of Kakuthstha, my father, and the lord 
of the earth as long as he lives — know thou this to be the 
eternal virtue. ,, 

Thus addressed by RSma, Kauyalya of auspicious looks, 
being gratified greatly ; spoke unto him, the remover of her 
sorrows. “Truly it is.” RSma, the foremost amongst religious 
men, being spoken thus, said to his mother, who was 
greatly disturbed with sorrow, again in the following 
strain. “Proper it is both for thee and me to carry out 
father's words : he is thy husband, and my best preceptor 
and the lord and master of all people. With great 
pleasure shall I abide in thy words after passing these 
nine and five years in the great forest.” Thus addressed, 
Kau£aly&, bearing great affection for her son, sorely pained 
and having her eyes full of tears, spoke unto her beloved 
son the following words. “Oh Rama, I shall not be able 
to live amongst these co-wives, if art thou resolved to 
go to the forest for the discharge of thy father's behest ; 
do thou take me with thee, Oh Kakuthstha, like unto a wild 
hind. Klma, supressing his feeling, spoke unto his mother 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RlMlVANA 



262 

who was lamenting, thus, saying : — “Husband is thfc deity and 
master of the wife as long as she lives ; so the monarch being 
the lord can deal with thee and me in any way he likes. 
That highly intelligent lord of men living, we should not con- 
sider ourselves as without a master. Bharata is also pious and 
beloved of all people in speech — he.intenton the performance 
of religious services, shall attend upon thee always. Do thou 
now take care that on my retiring the monarch does not wear 
away by the pangs of my separation, that this terrible sorrow 
may not kill him. Do thou look after the welfare of the 
old king always. The woman, who serves not her husband, 
being engaged in excellent religious rites and fasts, shall fare 
wretchedly in the life to come ; and a woman gets at the excel- 
lent abode of the celestials by serving her husband. Even 
those who do not worship and bow unto the celestials should 
serve their husbands alone being intent upon their welfare. 
Such is the virtue that should be always pursued by women 
according to the Vedas and Smritis. Do thou beguile thy 
time, Oh worshipful one, expecting my return, by worshipping 
the celestials with flowers and oblations unto the fire and 
serving well the Brahmins. Engaged in discipline and fasting i 
and devoted to the services of thy husband thou shalt 
attain thy best desire, on my return, if this foremost of pious 
men lives then. Being thus accosted by RSma, Kau^alyi 
being distressed with the thought of separation from her son, 
spoke unto him with tears in her eyes the following words. 
“Oh my darling ! it is beyond my power to dissuade thee 
from thy firm resolution for going to the forest ; it is im- 
possible to avoid this hour of separation. Go thou my son, 
with an earnest heart ; may thou fare well ; my anxiety shall 
be removed on thy return. Attain shall I then great 
happiness, when thou, Oh great one, shalt return after satis- 
fying your vows and making thyself freed of debts unto 
thy father. Incomprehensible is the action of Destiny in 
this world, Oh my son, as it drives thee away unto the forest, 



Digitized by 



Google 




AYODHYlKkNDAM. 



263 



Oh RSghava, neglecting my request. Do thou now repair, 
Oh mighty hero, and come back in peace, and console me 
with soul-soothing, tender words. Oh my darling, shall that 
day ever come, when I shall see thee return from the forest, 
wearing bark and matted hair.” With great earnestness, the 
worshipful one began to eye Rama, determined to go as an 
exile unto the forestand spoke unto him auspicious words and 
became desirous of performing benedictory ceremonies. 



SECTION XXV, 



TC aucalya subduing her sorrow, and touching holy water, 
began to perform auspicious ceremonies for Rama, and spoke 
unto him saying “Do thou, Oh best amongst the descendants 
of Raghu, repair now, as I cannot dissuade thee, but do thou 
return speedily and, follow the footsteps of great ones. Let 
that virtue, Oh best of RSghavas, protect thee, which thou 
hast followed with gladness and self-discipline. Let the deities, 
whom you worship every day in the temple, together with 
the Maharshis protect thee in the forest. Let those weapons 
conferred upon thee by the great VisvSmitra protect thee 
always, gifted with good qualities. Do thou of mighty hands 
live forever, being protected by the truth and merit of thy 
continual services to thy father and mothers. May the 
holy fuel, sacrificial grass, sanctified altars and court-yards, 
the sacred ground of medicant Brahmins, mountains, trees 
great and small, lakes, birds, s er pents and lions protect thee. 
Oh best of men, may Sidhya * BishvadevaA Maruta.% the 
great ascetics, the sustainer, anj preserver of the creation 

* An inferior deity or demigod. — T. 

f Deities of a particular class in which ten are enumerated ; their names 
are Vasu , Satya, and so forth. — T. 

J A deity personifying wind. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A 



RlMlVANA. 



164 

Pusa f * Bhagaji Aryam& y % the Lokap&las ,§ headed by Indra 
and others, the six seasons, the months, day, night, moments 
Srutisft f SmrittSy || and virtue protect thee, Oh my son, on all 
sides. May the great deity Skanda , Soma , Vrihaspati t Sap - 
tarshiy Narad , Moon and other ascetics protect thee. May 
the encircled regions with their lords, being pleased with my 
eulogy, protect thee, Oh my son, always in the forest. When 
shalt thou repair unto the wood, may the mountains, oceans, 
Varuna, the heaven, sky, earth, air, things movable and im- 
movable, planets and stars with their presiding deities, day, 
night, and evening protect thee. May the six seasons, months 
years and all the divisions of time confer upon thee 
pleasure always, when thou of great intelligence shalt wander 
away into the forest in the attire of an ascetic. May the 
deities and demons ever minister unto thy happiness and 
may not fear proceed unto thee, Oh my son, from the terrible 
Rlksashas and Pis&chas intent on committing cruel deeds, 
and other animals living on flesh. May the apes, scorpions, 
wild gnats, reptiles and insects make thee no harm ; may not 
the elephants, tigers, terrible looking bears, hogs, buffalos 
and other horned animals hurt thee. Being worshipped by 
me from here may the ferocious cannibal races of all kind 
bring thee no injury. May thy course be crowned with 
auspiciousness and thy powers with success. Do thou, Oh 
my son, repair unto the forest, being profusely provided 
with fruits, roots and other things. May all the creatures of 
the sky, all those who breathe on this Earth, and all those 
deities who are hostile unto thee, contribute to thy welfare. 
May Sukra Soma , Sun, the lord of wealth and Death, protect 

• The sun.— T. 

t The moon. — T. 

J A class of manes or deified progenitors. — T. 

$ Those deities who protect the regions, vim., the sun, moon, fire wind, 
Indra, Yama , Varuna , Kuvera. — T. 

5 The Vedas severally or collectively. — T. 

r The body of laws as delivered by Manu or others.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHVlKlNDAAl. 



265 



thee, Oh Rlma, resorting to the forest of Dandaka. May fire, 
air, smoke and the mantras uttered by the Rishis protect thee, 
Oh descendant of Raghu, at the time of thy bathing. May the 
lord of creation, Rishis and all the remaining deities defend 
thee when dwelling in the forest. 

That best of women Kaucalya, of great renown and having 
expansive eyes, after propitiating the celestials with gar- 
lands, fragrant odours and praises, began to offer oblations 
unto the fire by the help of eminent Brahmins for the welfare 
of Rama, collecting clarified butter, white garlands, reli- 
gious fig trees and white mustard seeds for this pur- 
pose. The spiritual preceptor, after offering oblations unto 
the fire with due rites for his peace and health, presenting 
what was then left as offerings unto the lords of the four car- 
dinal points and others,* and giving the Brahmins a dish of 
curd, ghee and honey, made them utter benedictory prayers 
for R5tma who was going unto the forest. Then that renown- 
ed mother of Rama, after conferring upon the Brahmins 
dakhshinds , in accordance with their desires, accosted R&gha- 
va with the following words. “May that blessing crown thee, 
which was attained by the thousand eyed Indra, honored jpf 
all the deities on the occasion of killing the mighty Aa*j^ 
Vetra. May that blessing attend thee, which was invo^A 
in olden times by VinatS, for that king of birds Garuda, 

* The Garhyastabali or the daily offering of the householder, meant here, 
may be thus explained. After the performance of oblation unto the fire, the 
householder should present offerings to the lords of the four cardinal points.— 
Indra, Yama, Varuna, Soma and to their retinue. The offering for the Marutas 
should be placed on the threshold ; for the presiding deities of the water in 
water ; for the lords of the forest unto the wooden pestle and mortar ; for Sri and 
Bhadrakali on the grounds adjacent to the beddings on the side of the head and 
that of the feet respectively ; for Brahmanspati and Vastupati on the site of tha 
habitation ; for Visvadeva and for day and night thrown in the air of the house, 
for Sarvatmabhuta scattered on the terrace. After offering to all these what 
remains should be thrown on the south for the manes. The offerings to the 
dogs, the fallen, the dregs of the people, the lepers, the crows and the worms 
and the insects should be placed on uncovered ground. 

34 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





RlMllANA. 



26* 

praying for nectar. Do thou attain that blessedness, for 
which Aditi prayed, on behalf of the weilder of thunder-bolt 
intent on the discomfiture of the giants at the time of 
ransacking the ocean for nectar. May that prosperity wait 
upon thee, Oh Rilma, which crowned the mighty Vishnu, while 
perambulating with his three steps the heaven earth and the 
regions as a dwarf. May the Rishis, the great oceans, islands, 
the three worlds, Vedas, the regions, lend their might in the 
advancement of thy welfare.” Saying this Kau9aly3, the 
foremost of all women, having expansive eyes, placed the 
grains on Rama's head ; sprinkled his body with fragrant 
substances, and tied to his hands, as amulet, twigs of such 
auspicious plants as visalyakarani , with due mental 
repetition of mantras . That excellent one of high renown, 
embracing Rama and smelling his head, with her voice 
choked, as if all pleased* though placed under the 
influence of dire distress in reality, uttered mantras and 
spoke unto him thus. “Oh my son, Oh Rlma, have thy 
desires attained — and do thou go, wherever thou likest. I 
shall see thee, Oh my darling, with great delight, when shalt 
thou, returning Ayodhya in excellent health and having all 
thy ends satisfied, resume the administration of thy kingdom. 
Myself having sorrows removed and having my face glowing 
with joy, shall see thee coming from the forest like unto 
the rising of the full moon. Continually shall I eye thy good 
self, Oh my son sitting on an auspicious seat, and return- 
ing from the forest after making good thy father's behests. 
May thou returning from the forest and being dressed with 
royal robes and ornaments, satisfy the desires of my daughter- 
in-law. Worshipped have I deities headed by Siva and 
others, the great ascetics, the genii and the snakes ; may 
they all and the four cardinal points, Oh Raghava, contri- 
bute to thy welfare, who, art going unto the forest for a long 
time.” Kau9alya, having her eyes full of tears, and per- 
forming the benedictory ceremonies with due rites, went 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHrlKlNDAM. 



*67 



round Rlghava with solemnity, and seeing him again and 
again sighed hot and hard. Being gone round by his mother 
thus, R&ghava, of great fame, and resplendent with the 
splendour of beauty, proceeded towards the abode of SitS, 
after bowing down unto the feet of his mother repeatedly. 



SECTION XXVI. 

Rama, intent on repairing unto the forest, and treading 
in pious tracks, after duly saluting Knufalya and beautifying 
the royal road, crowded with people, captivated their hearts 
by means of his high accomplishments. Vaidehi, ever 
engaged in ascetic rites, did not hear of all these affairs ; 
there was in her heart only the thought of Rama’s installation. 
That daughter of the king, after offering her service unto 
the deities according to the proper royal rites, was eagerly 
awaiting the approach of Rama with a grateful and pleased 
heart. Entered Rama this beautiful abode, excellently fur- 
nished and filled with people highly delighted, having his 
head hanging down a little with shame. Sitl, seeing her 
husband, racked with sorrow and troubled in mind with 
anxiety, rose up trembling from her seat. Seeing her, that 
virtuous souled Raghava, could not bear his internal sorrow, 
which manifested itself by external signs. Finding him with 
face pale and perspiring, and incapable' of containing grief 
within, Sita sore distressed with sorrow addressed him, saying, 
“Oh my lord, why do I perceive such a change in thee ? To- 
day the constellation Pushya is in conjunction with the moon, 
and planet Vrihaspati is presiding over this conjunction, 
this day has been declared as the most auspicious one by 
the learned Brahmins, then why do thou cherish such a sorrow 
in thy mind ? Why has not thy charming face been placed 
un der the shade of an umbrella, having hundred ribs and 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




268 



RlMlYANA. 



and white as a watery foam ? Why do not the servants fan 
thee, having eyes like lotus* petals, with chowries white 
as the moon or a goose ? Ido not see thee, Oh best of men, 
eulogised with auspicious songs by the panegyrists, enco- 
miasts and family bards. Why do not the Brahmins, versed 
in the Vedas, observing the formal rites, sprinkle on thy 
head honey and curd, after washing it duly ? Why are not 
thy subjects, citizens, urbans, and leading members of society 
dressed and adorned, willing to follow thee ? Why does not 
that excellent sport-chariot go before thee, having four fast 
going steeds, adorned with golden ornaments tied unto it ? 
Why does not that excellent elephant precede ther, Oh great 
hero, which is gifted with auspicious marks and resembles 
a mass of dark clouds and a mighty hill ? Why do not the 
servants run before thee, Oh mighty hero, with a pretty look- 
ing royal seat embroidered with gold ? Why do I perceive 
thy face so pale as never seen before, and why therein is 
no mark of gladness, when every thing for thy installa- 
tion has been made ready ?” Wereupon spoke unto 
that weeping Sit§, the descendant of Raghu thus : — “Oh 
Sita, Oh thou born of a great family, versed in the know- 
ledge of religion and intent on the performance of religious 
rites, my father has banished me unto the forest ! Do thou 
hear, Oh daughter of Janaka, how has this calamity befallen 
me. In the days of yore was granted unto my mother, 
Kaikeyi two boons by my father, king Da£aratha of truthful 
vows. When every thing was made ready by my father for 
my installation, Kaikeyi reminded him of his promise and 
gained over him for his righteousness. I shall live in the 
forest of Dandaka for fourteen years and Bharata shall be 
installed by my father as the heir apparent of the throne. 
And myself bound to fly as an exile unto the wood, have 
come here to see thee ; do thou not praise me ever before 
Bharata. Those who are crowned with prosperity cannot 
bear another's praise \ it therefore behoves thee not to extol 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHYlKlNDAM . 



269 



my virtues in the presence of Bharata. Thou shouldst 
not extol me even in the company of thy friends ; thou shalt 
be then able to live with Bharata as one favourable to his 
party. The monarch has granted him this lasting heir 
apparentship ; it is therefore proper for thee, Oh Sita, to 
please him specially for he is the king now. To day shall 
I repair unto the forest for redeeming my father’s vows ; do 
thou, Oh high-minded one, live here in undisturbed mind. 
Do thou, Oh sinless and auspicious one, live here engaged 
in religious rites and fasts, when I shall wend my way unto 
the forest inhabited by the great ascetics. Rising from the 
bed early in the morning, adore the deities every day, and 
then bow down unto the feet of my father Da£aratha, the 
lord of men. My mother Kau<?alya is old and much pressed 
down with sorrow ; do thou show proper respects unto her, 
considering it to be a pious deed. Thou shouldst then bow 
down unto my other mothers who all minister unto nfe, with 
equal love and affection. Shouldst thou specially regard 
Bharata and Satrugna like unto thy sons or brothers, 
who are dearer unto me than my life itself. Thou shouldst 
not do, Oh Vaidehi, any such thing as might be unpleasant 
unto Bharata, for he is the king of the land as well as of 
the family. 

The monarchs are always propitiated by being served with 
assiduity and good temper ; they are offended when any 
thing contrary to it happens. They renonnee even their own 
son, born of their loins, when they find him bringing about 
their mischief, and admit into their favour persons devoted 
to their welfare bearing no relationship whatever. It therefore 
behoves thee, Oh auspicious one, to live here, abiding by 
Bharata’s commands and being engaged in religious rites 
and truthful vows. I am going unto the forest, Oh my dar- 
ling, and thou shalt live here. Oh excellent lady, abide by 
my word as didst thou never formerly falsify it. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




*70 



rA.uA vana. 



S E CT I ON XXVII. 



Being addressed thus, Vaidehi, beloved and sweet speech- 
cd, spoke unto her husband the following words, offended 
as it were on account of her great affection. “Is it that thou 
speakest me thus, thinking me, no doubt, mean minded ? I can 
hot but laugh at thy words, Oh best of men ; what thou hast 
said is not becoming of a mighty prince versed in military 
arts and is really very opprobrious and infamous. What more, 
it is not proper even to hear them. Oh dear husband, father, 
mother, son, brother, daugther-in-law, all of them abide by 
the consequences of their own actions, it is the wife alone,- 
Oh best of men, that shares the fate of her husband ; it is 
therefore that ever along with thee I have been ordered to 
live in the forest. Neither father, mother, son, friends, nor 
her ownself is the stay of a woman in this or in after life, 
it is the husband alone that is her only support. If dost thou 
repair to-day unto the forest impregnable, I shall go before 
thee, Oh Raghava, treading upon the thorns and prickly 
grass. Confident do thou take me with thee, Oh great hero, 
renouncing jealousy and indignation, like unto water left 
after drinking; there exists no sin in me that could justify 
forsaking. Unto woman is preferable under all circumtances 
the shade of her husband's feet to the tops of a palace, 
the celestial car or excursion in the airy path.* I have been 
taught by my father and mother to follow my husband in all 
conditions of life ; and I shall carry out now what I have been 
taught; I shall not abide by any other counsel. I shall wend 
my way unto the forest impassable, devoid of men. inhabited 
by various deers, tigers and other voracious animals. Happily 
shall I live there as if in my paternal house, giving no thought 
upon the prosperity of the three worlds, thinking only 

* It was generally believed that by cevtain processes of Yoga one acquired 
power to fly in the air. — T. 



‘V. v 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHl'JiKlNDAM. 



271 



of the services that are to be rendered ynto my husband. I 
shall sport with thee, Oh great hero,in that forest impregnated 
with the fragrance of flowers, tending thee constantly, 
having my senses subdued, and being engaged in austere 
performances. Oh great hero, capable art thou to maintain 
many thousand others in the forest, what of me. Surely 
shall I go to-day to the forest with thee ; there is no doubt 
about it and thou shalt not be able, Oh great hero, to dis- 
suade me from so doing. Undoubtedly I shall always live 
upon roots and fruits ; living with thee always I shall not bring 
about thy affliction. Always I shall precede thee when walk- 
ing, and shall take my repast after thou hast taken it. Willing 
am 1 to view mountains, rivulets, lakes and ponds. Being 
fearless in thy company, Oh my intelligent husband and great 
hero, I shall behold on all sides ponds filled with wild geese 
and ducks and beautified with a collection of fullblown lotuses, 
and shall bathe there every day, pursuing the same vow with 
thee. And greatly gratified, I shall, Oh thou having expansive 
eyes, amuse there with thee, in this manner, even for hundred 
or thousand years. I shall never experience the reverse of 
fortune, inasmuch as I do not like to live in the abode of 
celestials, Oh RSghava, if I am to dwell there without thee \ 
no, it is not pleasing unto me, Oh best of men. I shall go 
there in that dense forest full of deers, monkeys and elephants 
and live there as if under my paternal roof cleaving unto thy 
feet and abiding in thy pleasure. Do thou accept my entreaty 
whose heart is entirely thine, knows none else, and is ever at- 
tached unto thee, and who am resolved to die if forsaken by 
thee ; thus repairing I shall be in no way a burden unto thee". 
That best of men, reluctant to take Sita with him, who had 
spoken thus and who was greatly attached to virtue, related 
unto her about the many miseries consequent upon dwelling in 
the forest, with a view to prevent her from following him. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




2J2 



RlMXlANA. 



SECTION XXVIII. 



T HAT lover of virtue, thinking of the miseries of the 
forest, resolved not to take Sita with him, who was versed in 
religious lores and had spoken thus. And consoling her whose 
eyes were stained with tears, that virtuous-souled one spoke 
unto her the following words with a view to prevent her 
from going. “Oh Sita, thou art born of an illustrious 
family and ever intent on the performance of religious deeds ; 
do thou practise virtue here as it may conduce to the happi- 
ness of my mind. Oh Sita, Oh thou of the weaker sex, do 
thou act up to my counsels ; there are evils enough in the 
forest, do thou learn them from me who am about to dwell 
in it. Renounce therefore, Oh Sita, thy intention of flying 
as an exile unto the forest, which for its impenitrableness 
is said to abound in evils. It is for thy welfare that I give 
utterance to these words ; happiness there is none, it is 
always covered with miseries. The roarings of the lions 
living in the caves of mountains, swelling with the sounds 
of the waterfalls, produce a very painful impression upon 
the ears ; so the wood is full of misery. Animals, all mad- 
dened, sporting in solitude, seeing (man), approach to attack 
him ; so the wood is full of misery. The rivers are full of 
crocodiles, sharks, and other fearful animals, muddy and im- 
passable and always infested with infuriated elephants ; so 
the wood is full of misery. There the wayfares are covered 
with creepers and thorns : they are void of drinking water 
ever resounded with the noise of the wild fowls ; so the wood 
is full of misery. Being exhausted with the toil of the day, 
the dwellers of the wood have to sleep in night on the bed 
made of leaves fallen from the trees on the surface of the 
ground ; so the wood is full of misery. With the (supply of; 
fruits that have fallen from the trees man of self discipline 
must content himself morning and evening ; so the wood, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHFlKXNDAM. 



*73 

O Sita, is full of misery. One has to fast, O Maithili, 
according to his might, to wear matted hair and bark, to 
adore the deities and his ancestors according to due rites, 
every day to serve the guests that come to him, and 
observing the rules of asceticism, to bathe every day thrice, 
namely, in the morning, in the mid-day and in the evening; 
so the wood is full of misery. One has to offer presents 
of flowers collected by his ownself unto the altars, O Sita, 
according to the rites of the ascetics ; so the wood is full of 
misery. Those that dwell in the forest will have to remain 
content, having practised moderation in food, O Maithili, 
with whatever edibles are attainable in the forest ; so the 
wood is full of misery. There are always violent winds, 
darkness, hunger, and great fear; so the wood is full of 
misery. Reptiles, many and of various kinds, creep there 
on the path, O excellent lady, with haughtiness ; so the wood 
is full of misery. And snakes living in the rivers and of 
crooked course like them, always await the wayfarers, 
hindering the passers-by : so the wood is full of misery. 
Birds, scorpions, insects musquitos and wild gnats, always 
disturb the dwellers, O fair one of the weaker sex ; so the 
wood is full of misery. There are trees full of thorns, having 
their branches moving to and fro, and the kusa and kdsa 
grasses with thorny blades constantly undulating; so the 
wood is full of misery. There are various physical afflictions 
and divers fears and great misery consequent upon living in 
the forest. Anger and desires are to be renounced, the heart 
is to be set on ascetic austerities, fear in the fearful objects is 
to be cast off; so the wood is full of misery. Thou shouldst 
not therefore go unto the forest — it forebodes no good unto 
thee. Weighing well, have I concluded that the forest 
abounds in innumerable evils.” While the high-souled Rama, 
resolved thus not to take Sita with him unto the forest, she, 
greatly sorry, did not accept his words and spoke unto him in 
the following way. 

35 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




*74 



RXMlYANA. 



SECTION xxix. 



Hearing these words of Rama, Sita greatly sorry, with 
tears in her eyes, spoke gently unto him the following words. 
“The evils, thus enumerated by thee of living in the forest, 
do thou know, appear as so many good qualities unto me, 
who have been made forward by thy affection. Deer, lions, 
elephants, tigers, saravas * chamaras,f srimarasX and other 
animals which have not seen thee before, seeing thee, O 
RSghava, will stand off, for they all fear thee. I shall 
follow thee, taking the permission of the respected ones ; 
without thee, O Rama, I will renounce my life. If I live 
by thee, O RSghava, Sakra , the lord of celestials, shall not 
be able with his mighty power to defeat me. ‘A woman, 
without her husband, cannot live* ; this truth has been pointed 
out by thee, O Rama, unto me. Besides, I heard before, 

0 thou of great intelligence, in my paternal house from the 
Brahmanas that I should live in the forest. I have heard 
this from the Brahmanas versed in palmistry, and I have all 
along been anxious, O mighty hero, to go to the forest ; I 
shall therefore obtain permission and go, O dearly beloved, 
unto the forest with thee ; nothing can make it otherwise. 

1 shall secure permission and follow thee; the time has 
arrived ; may the Brahmanas be of truthful words ! I know, 
O great hero, that there are many evils incident to living 
in the forest ; but they generally befall those men who have 
not their senses subdued. I heard, when I was a girl, that 
an ascetic woman of well-disciplined character, came to my 
mother and apprised her of my future abode in the forest. 

• A fabulous animal supposed to have eight legs and to inhabit particularly 
the snowy mountains.— T. 

t A kind of deer, or rather the Bos Gruriniens erroneously classed by the 
Hindu writers amongst the deer. — T. 

t A young deer.— T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




a y ODH Fl kAnda m. 



*75 



I had requested thee, O my lord, many times before in this 
house to take me to the forest with thee for enjoyment, 
and thou wast pleased to agree. For thy welfare, O RSghava, 
having received thy permission to follow thee, I like to serve 
thee, O great hero, while living in the forest. 

O thou, pure-hearted one, surely shall I become sinless 
if I follow my husband, out of affection ; for my husband is my 
Divinity. I have heard this pious report from the Brahmanas 
of great fame that even in after life thy company is greatly 
beneficial unto me. She, who has been given away as wife 
by her father to one, with due rites of gift peculiar to each 
class, touching holy water, shall be his, even in her after 
life. For what reason then dost thou not wish to take thy 
wife with thee who is of good character and devoted to her 
husband ? Do thou take me, O K&kuthstha, who am poor 
in spirit, devoted to my husband, ever given to thy service, 
and participating equally in thy joy and sorrow. If thou dost 
not purpose to take me with thee, surely will I do away with 
my life by drinking poison, entering into fire, or drowning 
myself in water.” She begged Rama in these and various other 
means to take her with him, but that mighty hero did not 
consent to lead her into the lonely forest. Being accosted 
thus, Maithili was wrapt up in thought and bathed her breast 
with tears trickling down from her eyes. And K&kuthstha 
having control over his ownself, with a view to dissuade her 
who was angry and engrossed in anxious thoughts, began to 
console her in divers ways. 



Digitized by 



Google 




rAajAfana. 



*76 



SECTION XXX. 



Being consoled thus by R3ma, maithili, the daughter 
of Janaka, fearing separation, lovingly and haughtily laughed 
at RSghava of spacious breast, and spoke unto him, her 
husband, the following words with a view to follow him to 
the forest. “What thought of thee, O R&ma, my father, the 
king of Mithila, accepting thee as his son-in-law, who was 
a man in form but (in deeds) a woman ? Henceforth, if 
people through ignorance say that the sun has not that 
burning flood of light which in Rama does shine forth, 
woe is them, it is falsehood. Why art thou so dejected 
and whence is thy fear that thou art willing to leave behind 
thy wife who has none else but thee ? Know me to be 
perfectly under thy influence like unto Sdvitri *, following 
her husband Satvavdn } the son of Dumat Sen. I have not, 
like one bringing stigma on her line, ever in my life thought 
of a second person, but of thee whom I must follow into the 
forest. Dost thou, like unto an ordinary actor, wish to hand 
me over to others, who am chaste, pure as a virgin, and long 
held in conjugal affection ? O sinless one, do thou become 
subservient and serviceable to him whose pleasure thou biddst 
me seek, and for whom thou hast suffered thyself to be im- 
peded (in the installation). It does not behove thee to repair 
unto the forest without taking me along with thee. Be it 
the austerity of an ascetic, the forest or heaven, with 
thee will I be everywhere. No toil shall I suffer on the way, 
as if lying on a bed of luxury, while following thee in 
thy footstep. When with thee, the various thorny grasses, 
the Kusa , the Kdsa, the Sara , and the Ishika , and the 
thistles and brambles on the way, shall be unto me in 
touch like unto linen and deer-skin. The dust that will 
cover me, thrown up by the gush of wind, shall be, 
O ravisher of my heart, regarded by me as the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHYlKkNDAM . 



177 



finest sandal dust. When I shall lie down on the bed of green 
grass in the forest, it shall appear to me more pleasant than 
one covered with a colored blanket. Fruits, roots and leaves 
which thou wilt bring thyself and give me, be they great or 
small in quantity, shall be to me like unto the ambrosia-juice. 

I shall never think of my father, mother, or my abode ; I shall 
enjoy fruits and flowers growing in various seasons. Thou shalt 
not witness any thing disagreeable there ; for me thou shalt 
not experience any sorrow,nor shall I be a burden unto thee ; 
do thou take me with thee, O Rama, conceiving with 
pleasure that thy company is a heaven unto me and thy ab- 
sence a hell. If thou dost not take me unto the forest which 
I count freed from all evils, surely I shall drink poison and 
never come under the influence of my enemie9.When through 
affliction I shall not live after separation, better it is, O Lord, 
that I die immediately at the time of my being forsaken by 
thee ; I cannot bear this grief even for a moment. How shall 
I be able to live without thee for fourteen years ?” 

Thus lamenting, Sita, racked with sorrow, embraced 
her husband and began to cry aloud. Like unto a she- 
elephant,she being pierced by the poisonous shafts of R&ma’s 
words, began to shed tears, long kept off, as an A rant wood 
emits fire continually. Tears caused by her sorrow and 
white as the crystal began to trickle down from her eyes, 
like unto water falling in drops from lotus petals. And that 
beautiful face having expansive eyes and resembling the full 
moon in its splendour, with tears became pale and parched, 
like unto a lotus taken out of its watery bed. Finding her 
almost insensible with sorrow, Rama flung his arms round 
her and reviving her (with consolation) spoke the following 
words unto her ; “I do not long for, O worshipful one, 
even the abode of celestials gained through thy affliction : 
fear there is noue for me like unto the self-create Brahma. 
Not apprised of thy full intention, O thou of beautiful count- 
enance, I could not, though capable of escorting thee> 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




2 7 8 



RlMlYANA . 



desire thy abode in the forest. When thou art determines 

0 Maithili, to repair unto the forest with me, I cannoJ 
leave thee behind, as one possessing self knowledge cannoq 
renounce munificence. O thou, having thighs resembling! 
the trunks of an elephant, I shall resort to that virtue which 
was exercised by great and good men going before ; do I 
thou follow me therefore like SuvarchalS following the Sun. 

1 cannot but go unto the forest, O daughter of Janaka, as 
the truthful word of my father leads me thereto. Obedience 
unto his parents is the virtue of a son. Disobeying the 
command of my father I am not eager to live. Why 
should we with meditations and adorations worship Destiny, 
which is not cognizable to the worshippers, neglecting our 
parents, who are ever present to our senses ? In the 
worship of the parents are fulfilled the triple object of 
religious pursuit, and the adoration of the three regions ; there 
is nothing equal to it, conducing to purity ; so do I, O thou 
of excellent look, resort to it. 

Truth, almsgiving, honor, and sacrifices with profuse gifts 
are not so strengthening (in the life to come) as the services 
rendered unlo the parents. Heaven, wealth, grains, learning, 
son, and happinesss, — nothing remains inaccessible unto us. 
Great souls following the desires, and resorting to the 
service of their parents, get at the abodes of celestials, 
Gandharvas, the seats of BrahmS and Vishnu, and other 
excellent regions. Therefore do I desire to follow what my 
lather commands me, treading in the path of truth, — and this 
is the virtue eternal. My resolution of not taking thee, O 
SitS, unto the forest of Dandaka is now rent asunder, as 
thou hast prepared thyself to live in the forest and follow me. 
Permitted by me, O fair one of exquisite beauty, to repair 
unto the forest, do thou follow me, O thou timid one, and be 
the partner of my righteousness. Thy determination to follow 
me, O beautiful one, is very excellent and is in perfect 
keeping with myself and my family. Do thou address thyself 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A YODHrkKlNDAM . 



279 

:to repairing unto the forest, for without this now even 
heaven itself does not please me. Do thou give away 
Jewels unto the Br2hmanas and edibles unto the beggars 
.longing for them, and make haste without delay. Confer 
.upon the Brclhmanas, valuable ornaments, excellent clothes, 
pleasant toys, beds, conveyances and other fine things in thy 
.possession and then what remains do thou distribute amongst 
the servants.” Convinced that her going to the forest was 
desired by her husband, Sita began to distribute them speedily 
with a delighted heart. 



SECTION XXXI. 



Tf EARfNG this conversation, Lakshmana, who had gone 
there before, with tears in his eyes and being unable to bear 
this terrible sorrow, took hold of his brother's feet and spoke 
thus unto that greatly renowned Sita and R&ghava. “If thou 
art resolved to repair unto the forest filled with deer and 
elephants, I shall accompany thee, always going before 
with bows in my hands. Thou shalt range with me in 
that charming part of the forest which resounds with the 
music of the birds and the humming of the bees. Alienated 
from thee 1 do not long for the abode of the celestials, nor for 
eternal life, nor for the wealth of the three regions.” The son 
of Sumitr&, who spoke thus and was determined upon going 
to the forest, being repeatedly requested by R&ma with 
consoling words to desist from his purpose, spoke unto him 
the following words. “Formerly thou didst order me to 
follow thee ; and why dost thou prevent me now from accom- 
panying thee to the forest ? I want to learn, O sinless one, 
why thou dost prevent me now from following thee. I enter- 
tain a grave doubt in this.” Then the highly effulgent Rama 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




s 8 o 



rAmXfana. 



spoke thus unto that sedate Lakshmana, who stood praying 
before him with clasped hands. “Thou art sedate, Fond 
of virtue, of peaceful temper, and thou walkest always in the 
paths of righteousness. I hold thee dear as my life and thou 
art obedient unto me and art my friend. If thou dost accom- 
pany me unto the forest, O son of SumitrlL, who shall serve 
Kausalyl and the highly renowned SumitrS. ? That highly 
effulgent lord of earth who will satisfy the world with the 
fulfillment of its desires like unto rain spreading in showers 
over the earth, is himself now shackled with desires unto 
Kaikeyi. That daughter of A9wapati obtaining this kingdom 
from the monarch, there will be no end of the miseries of 
these co-wives. Bharata attaining the throne and siding his 
mother, Kaikeyi will never think of Kau9aly& or Sumitri 
sore distressed with grief. Do thou therefore, O son of 
Sumitri, live here of thy own accord or by the favour of the 
monarch, and maintain these worshipful ones. If thou dost 
act thus, it will be showing thy best regard in me. O thou, 
versed in the knowledge of religion, real virtue consists in 
the adoration of superiors. Do this, O son of SumitrS, for 
my sake ; if we all go away leaving her aside, she will not be 
happy in any way.” 

Accosted thus by Rama, Lakshmana, well versed in 
speech, spoke unto him the following humble words. “Being 
afraid of thy power, O hero, Bharata shall adore Kau 9 alya 
and SumitrS. — there is no doubt about this. If that wicked Bha- 
rata obtaining this excellent kingdom, does not maintain and 
take care of them, being impelled by haughtiness and wicked 
impulses, surely shall I kill him, that wicked-minded one, 
though he be assisted by the entire population of the three re- 
gions. Besides, that worshipful Kau9aly§, who has made grants 
of many thousand villages unto her servants, can maintain 
thousands of people like us, and has enough to maintain herself 
as well as ray mother. Do thou therefore permit me to follow 
thee; there will be no breach of virtue in this, and I shall have 



Digitized by 



Google 




A Y ODH YAKANDA AL 



281 



my desires attained and thy interests shall be secured. I shall 
go before thee pointing out thy course, with stringed bows, a 
hoe, and a basket in my hands. I shall bring for thee every 
day various roots and fruits and other things that grow in the 
forest and which the ascetics use in their sacrifice. Thou 
shalt amuse thyself with Vaidehi on the sides of the hill, and I 
shall perform everything for thee whether thou art asleep or 
awake/ 1 

Being extremely gratified with these words, Rama spoke 
unto him, saying, — “Do thou follow me, O son of Sumitra, 
obtaining permission from all thy relatives. The high-souled 
Varuna himself offered two terrible-looking bows of etherial 
temper, two sets of weapons at the great sacrifice of the royal 
Janaka — namely, impenetrable mail, tw© quivers, two inex- 
haustible arrows, and two swords burnished with gold and 
bright as the Sun. These things were offered unto me as 
bridal presents, and I have kept them at the house of my 
preceptor. Do thou, O Lakshmana, paying homage unto my 
preceptor, taking all those weapons, swiftly bring them hither. 
Determined upon going unto the forest, Lakshmana, taking 
leave of his friends, went to the abode of the spiritual 
preceptor of the Ikshwakus and took from him those excellent 
weapons. And that best of princes, the son of Sumitr§, 
showed R£ma those heavenly arms- worshipped and well 
adorned with garlands. Seeing Lakshmana arrive there, 
R£ma, having control over his ownself, greatly pleased, spoke 
unto him the following words. “Thou hast arrived, O 
Lakshmana, just when I wanted thee. I want to distribute 
with thee these my riches amongst the Br&hmauas and the 
ascetics. There are many excellent Brahmanas having firm 
reverence in their preceptor. I want to distribute my wealth 
amongst them and many other personages who depend upon 
me for their maintenance. Bring here speedily the worship- 
ful Sujajna, the son of Vasishtha ; I want to repair unto the 
forest after duly adoring him and other excellent Brahmanas.' 1 

36 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




282 



RAmAfaNA. 



section xxxh. 

^Receiving this pleasant and beneficial mandate of his 
brother, Lakshmana speedily went unto the abode of Sujajna, 
and finding that Vipra in the chamber where the sacrificial 
fire was maintained, worshipped him and addressed him, 
saying ; “Friend, come and behold the abode of that one of 
arduous deeds (Rama) renouncing his incoming installation. ,f 
Finishing his prayers, Sujajna accompanied Lakshmana 
and arrived at the splendid mansion of Rama, filled with 
riches. No sooner Rama found that Brahmana versed 
in the Veda (Sujajna) arrive there, shining in effulgence 
like unto the blazing fire, than he rose up from his seat 
along with Sita, with clasped hands, and received him as 
if he had been the sacrificial fire itself, and offered him 
excellent golden Angadas , shining ear-rings, necklaces of 
jewels fastened together with golden strings, Keyuras , 
bracelets, and various other ornaments, and spoke unto 
him, being desired by Sita, the following words. “O my 
gentle friend j do thou by some servant send unto thy wife 
this necklace and Hemasutra. And Sita, the friend of thy 
wife, also intends to give this Rasand unto thy wife. And 
on the eve of her going to the woods, she presents thyself 
and thy wife with Angadas of curious workmanship and 
elegant Keyuras . And Vaidehi wishes to present thee with 
this fine bed-stead with its coverlet studed with various 
precious jewels. And I offer thee, O great ascetic, with a 
thousand gold coins, this excellent elephant, called the 
destroyer of foes, which had been bestowed upon me by my 
maternal uncle.” 

Being addressed thus by Rama, Sujajna accepted all 
those offers, and showered benedictions upon Rama, Sita, 
and Lakshmana. Thereupon Rama spoke unto his beloved 
considerate and fair-speaking brother, the son of Sumitri, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHYlKXNDA m. 



283 



the following pleasant words, like unto Brahma addressing 
the Lord of celestials. “O son of Sumitra, do thou invite 
the excellent BrShmanas, Agastya and ViswSmitra, and adore 
them, O Raghava, by conferring upon them gems, as people 
cherish corn with water. And O mighty armed one, do 
thou worship them, O Raghava, with a thousand cows, gold, 
silver, and various precious jewels. Do thou confer upon 
that good BrSLhmana, the preceptor of the Tittiriya portion 
of the Vedas , who crowns Kau£alya with blessings every 
day, silk cloth, conveyances, maid-servants, and such 
other things, till the twice-born one is satisfied. Do thou 
propitiate the worshipful Chitraralha, who is our charioteer 
and counsellor and of advanced years, with precious jewels 
clothes, wealth, with all kinds of beasts and a thousand 
cows. Do thou confer upon those Br&hmanas, O son of 
Sumitra, who live under my protection, studying the Kata 
section of Yayur Veda, with staffs in their hands, a grant of 
eighty mules loaded with jewels, of a thousand miles of pines, 
and of a thousand cows, for curd and clarified butter. They 
are always inactive, being constantly engaged in Vedic studies, 
and are greatly: slothful though having a taste for delicious 
food, and are always esteemed by great men ; to each of 
all those BrShmanas, who always come to Kau£alya, do thou, 
O Lakshmana,make a grant of a thousand gold coins, and offer 
unto them all such gifts as may please my mother. u There- 
upon Lakshmana, that best of men, distributed amongst all 
these BrShmanas all the entire riches as ordered by Rama like 
unto the Lord of wealth. Seeing his dependants in a wretched 
plight, shedding tears continually, Rama proferred unto then? 
various articles for their maintenance, and said : — “Do ye 
occupy in turn until our return my rooms as well as Laksh- 
mana’s.” Having spoken thus unto all those dependants who 
were racked with great sorrow, Rama ordered the Treasury 
officer to bring his riches there. Thereat, the servants brought 
all. his riches and collected them in great heaps. Rama, the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




>84 



RlAJlFAiVA. 



best of men, together with Lakshmana, distributed them 
amongst the Brahmanas, boys, the old, and the poor. There 
lived in that quarter a BrShmana of a tawny colour, by name 
TrijatS, descended from the line of Garga, earning his live- 
lihood by digging the earth with spades and ploughs. His 
young wife with her little children, struggling with poverty, 
spoke thus unto the old Brahmana. “Throwing aside thy 
spades and ploughs, do thou hear my words. Go and see the 
virtuous-souled RSma, and thou art sure to get something 
from him now.” Hearing these words of his wife, TrijatS, 
shining in effulgence like unto Vrigu and Angira, covering 
his body with a torn piece of cloth, proceeded towards RSma’s 
abode with his wife, and going on in a speedy and uninter- 
rupted course, reached at last the royal abode and spoke 
unto RSma thus : — “O mighty son of the king ! a poor man 
am I, having a number of children. I maintain my family by 
digging the earth ; do thou therefore look upon me mercifully." 
Whereupon RSma replied laughing : — “I have not distributed 
as yet even one thousand of my cows. Do thou hurl 
this rod, and thou art the master of all those cows occupying 
the space at the extremity of which this rod shall fall.” 
Upon this, swiftly tightening the cloth around his 
waist, TrijatS firmly grasping the rod hurled it with a 
mighty force. The rod, hurled off his hands, fell on 
the other side of the river Saraju in the midst of 
many thousand bullocks. Seeing this, the virtuous-souled 
RSma despatched to the hermitage of TrijatS all the cows 
that lay extending up to the banks of the river Saraju, and 
consoling him afterwards accosted him with the following 
words. “Be not offended, I acted thus only as a matter of 
joke. 1 asked thee to do this only with the object of knowing 
whether thou hadst the power to hurl this rod. Do thou ask 
of me now any thing thou likest. Truly do I speak that thou 
shouldst not hesitate. I am ready to devote my wealth to 
the services of the Brahmanas. And the wealth I have 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYlKlNDAM . 285 

earned will conduce to my favour, if I can apply it to your 
service.” 

Then Trijata, being pleased with the accession of cows, 
went away along with his wife, showering happiness and 
joy. R 5 ma of great manliness afterwards distributed with 
proper respect and due welcome all his wealth amassed by 
righteous means amongst the Brahmanas, friends, servants 
and the poor, according to the recomendation of his friends. 



SECTION XXXIII. 



Having distributed much wealth to the BrShmanas, the 
R&ghavas set out with Sit& for the purpose of seeing their 
father. And the two looked beautiful with a couple of hand- 
maids (following them), taking the weapons that had been 
decked by SitSL with flowery wreaths. Then crowds of ele- 
gantly-attired citizens, mounting on the terraces of three- 
storied and seven-storied houses, looked on the scene with 
hearts filled with sorrow. And unable to tread the streets 
because of a vast concourse, they ascending the terraces of the 
buildings, eyed RSghava with woe-begone eyes. And de- 
prived of their senses by grief, the multitudes,* beholding 
R&ma proceeding on foot in company with Sit§ and his 
younger brother, said, — “He that used to be followed by the 
vast body of the four-fold forces, proceeds now along with 
Sit§, followed by Lakshmana alone. Knowing every kind of 
enjoyment, that magnanimous one who has tasted of every 
luxury, for maintaining the dignity of morality, does not wish 
to falsify (his father's) word. And that SitS whom formerly 
the very rangers of the sky could not see, is to-day beheld 
by the passers-by. Now summer’s heat and winter's cold 

* Another reading is , — Beholding Rdma without his umbrella and walking 
afoot. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





286 



rAmAvana. 



and the rains of the wet season will speedily stain Siti.1 
whose person is worthy of being dyed, and who used tc | 
daub her limbs with red sandal paste. Surely to-day Da^a-i 
ratha speaks thus, possessed by some evil spirit; for the j 
king ought by no means to banish his beloved son. YVTjo 
ever exiles his son, albeit he be worthless ? And what is to 
be s;jid concerning a son that has fast secured all men’s hearts 
by his behavior ? Universal benevolence, kindness, learning, 
goodness, the restraint of the senses, and the control of the 
faculties, — these six qualities adorn that best of men, Ragha- 
va. Therefore the subjects will be afflicted in consequence 
of his separation, even as aquatic animals are ; when summer 
dries up the waters of a tank. The entire earth is distressed 
on account of the distress of this lord of the earth, even like 
a tree bearing blossoms and fruits, when its roots have been 
severed. Surely this highly effulgent one with virtue for his 
chief good, is the root of humanity, and the latter represents 
its flowers, fruits, foliage, and boughs. Therefore, accom- 
panied by our wives and friends will we like Lakshmana 
follow the departing RSLghava by the same way that he takes. 
And leaving aside our gardens and fields and abodes, will 
we, making the righteous R&ma’s happiness and misery our 
own, follow him. Let Kaikeyi possess herself of our deserted 
mansions, deprived of their buried treasures, with their un- 
swept courtyards robbed of kine and wealth, and shorn of all 
substance, filled with dust, and abandoned by the deities, man- 
sions where rats will run from hole to hole, which will neither 
emit smoke nor contain water, which will not be swept by 
broomsticks, from which sacrifices, and the slaughter of sacri- 
ficial beasts, and the offering of oblations, and the recitation of 
sacred texts, and Yapa, will be absent, and around which will 
be strewn broken earthenware, as they are on occasions of poli 
tical commotions or the occurrence of natural calamities. Let 
the forest to which R&ghava repairs resemble a city, and let 
this city renounced by us be converted into a wilderness. 



Digitized by Tooele 



4 



AYODHVKkXSDAM . 287 

Inspired by the fear of us, serpents will leave their holes, and 
beasts and birds the caves of mountain, and elephants 
and lions the forest. Let them occupy the tracts left be- 
hind by us, and let them renounce such abounding in ser- 
pents, beasts, and birds, as yield grass, meat, and fruits. 
Let Kaikeyi (reign in this realm) along with her sons and 
adherents ; we, renouncing homes, will dwell in the forest 
with R&ghava.” 

Rlghava heard various words uttered thus by the popu- 
lace ; and having heard them, he did not suffer his mind 
to be agitated. And that righteous one of the prowess of 
a mad elephant, from a distance begau to make for the 
residence of his father resembling in brightness a summit 
of the Kailua mountain. Entering the king’s mansion, he 
drawing nigh found the heroic Sumantra seated in dejected 
mood. Seeing that well-wisher of his thus depressed, R&ma 
endeavouring by all means to do his father’s bidding, cheer- 
fully went on, desirous of beholding his sire. And with the 
view of meeting the aggrieved king before repairing to the 
forest, the magnanimous son of the Ikshw&ku race, seeing 
Sumantra, stayed there, — so that that noble-minded one might 
inform his father of his visit. And making up his mind to go 
to the woods in accordance with the command of his father, 
Rlghava seeing Sumantra, said unto him ; “Do you inform 
the king of my arrival.” 



SECTION xxxl v. 



Then the mighty and incomparable Rama of eyes resembl- 
ing lotus-petals said unto the charioteer, — "Do you announce 
me to my father.” Thus commissoned by Rama, the charioteer 
entering the apartment, found the king heaving sighs, his 
senses overwhelmed with grief. And he saw the monarch 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




i8S 



RlMlYANA. 



like the sun afflicted by Rahu, or like fire enveloped in ashes, 
or like a tank deprived of -its water. Thereupon concluding 
that the king agitated by sorrow was bewailing R&ma, the 
charioteer said with joined hands. And first paying homage 
unto the king, invoking victory upon him, the charioteer, per- 
plexed with fear, softly and sweetly addressed the monarch 
thus : — “O foremost of men, your son waits at the entrance, 
after having distributed wealth to Br&hmanas and his retinue 
Let that one having truth for prowess, good betide you, see 
you. Having greeted all his friends, he now wishes to see you. 
Know that he is about to set out for the mighty forest. Do 
you,0 Lord of earth, see him furnished with every perfection, 
like the Sun himself surrounded by his rays.” Thereupon, 
that virtuous and truthful (king) resembling the ocean by 
virtue of his gravity, and motionless like the welkin, answered 
Sumantra, saying, — “O Sumantra, do thou bring hither my 
wives/* Reaching the inner apartment, the charioteer said 
unto the ladies,— “The worshipful king calls you. Do you 
come speedily.” Thus addressed by Sumantra at the man- 
date of the monarch, the ladies in a body, informed of their 
husband's command, went to the king's apartment. And three 
hundred and fifty females furnished with coppery eyes and 
observing vows, surrounding Kau 9 alya, proceeded slowly. On 
the females coming there, the monarch seeing this, said unto 
the charioteer, — “O Sumantra, do you bring hither my son.” 
Thereat the charioteer taking R&ma, Lakshmanaand Mithila’s 
daughter, speedily came before the lord of earth. The 
king seeing his son drawing nigh with joined hands, hastily 
rose up from his seat in company with his wives. And casting 
his eyes on RSLma, the king rushed towards him, but before 
reaching his son, the aggrieved monarch fell down to the 
earth in a swoon. Rama and that migthy car-warrior Laksh- 
roana swiftly neared the king striken with grief and rendered 
senseless by sorrow. And there arose in the palace cries 
of women by thousands of “Ah Rima,** mingled with the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A YODHYXKlNDAM . 



289 



tinkling of ornaments. Then both Rama and Lakshmana 
along with SitS. took the king up with their arms, and 
with tears in their eyes laid him upon the couch. When 
the lord of the earth oppressed with the vapour begot of 
grief and overwhelmed with emotion, had regained his senses, 
R&ma with joined palms said — “I ask you, O mighty 
monarch, as you are the lord of all. Do you see me safely 
despatched to the forest of Dandaka. Do you permit Laksh- 
mana, and let SitSL also follow me to the woods ; for although 
prohibited by me with various reasons, they do not wish to 
be left behind. Do you, O bestower of honor, permit us all, 
renouncing sorrow — Lakshmana and Sita and me, — like 
Praj&pati permitting his sons.” Seeing Raghava about to 
set out, for the forest, the lord of earth said unto the calm 
Rama waiting for his orders, — “O R5ghava, I have been 
deprived of my senses in consequence of my having conferred 
boons on Kaikeyi. Do you therefore confining me to-day 
become king in Ayodhya." Thus addressed by the monarch, 
R&ma — the best of the righteous — well versed in speech, with 
joined hands addressed his father thus, — “O king do you 
rule this earth for a thousand years, — I will reside in the 
forest. I do not wish for the kingdom. Having spent five 
and nine years in the woods, I shall again embrace your feet, 
O lord of men, after fulfilling your vow.” Fettered in the net 
of promise, the king bewailing his beloved son, secretly 
spurred on by Kaikeyi, said, — “Do you, my darling, with the 
view of attaining welfare here and hereafter and auspicious 
fortune, go calmly your fearless way, — so that you may return 
hither (in time.) I dare not, O descendant of the Raghu 
race, forbid you who are established in truth and who are 
bent upon discharging your duty. But, O son, do not by any 
means depart to-night : beholding you even for a single day, 
I shall feed with you. Do you, seeing me as well as your 
mother, stay here to-night. Then ministered unto every 
way, "you will set out to-morrow. O son, O beloved Raghava 

37 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




290 



RAajAfana. 



difficult is the task that you are going to perform,— for com- 
passing my good in the next world, you are ready to repair 
to the very woods ! But, O Raghava, I swear unto you, 
this is anything but agreeable to me, my son. I have been 
made to swerve from my purpose by the crafty Kaikeyi re- 
sembling a fire hidden under ashes. You are going to give 
effect to the deceit th^t has been practised upon me by this 
woman intent upon sullying her line. And as you are my 
eldest son, it is no wonder, O son, that you should wish to 
maintain your father's truth." Hearing these words of his dis- 
tressed father, the humble R2ma, along with his brother 
Lakshmana, said, — “Who will confer on me the merit to- 
morrow that I shall reap by going to-day ? Therefore, I pre- 
fer even the journey to the woods to enjoying comforts here. 
Do you bestow upon Bharata this earth renounced by me — 
this kingdom abounding in corn and kine and filled with 
people ; my mind determined upon dwelling in the forest,does 
not waver. Do you, O bestower of boons, grant Kaikeyi 
everything that you had promised unto her at the time of 
the war* (you had waged against the D&navas', and thereby 
do you follow truth. Obeying the mandate that you have 
issued, I will dwell in the forest for fourteen years in the 
company of the rangers of the woods. Do you without 
feeling any compunction confer the earth on Bharata. Mine 
is not the desire to obtain the kingdom for enjoying 
happiness or attaining any benefit. I will, O descendant 
of the RSghu race, do your bidding. Banish your grief, and 
suppress your tears. That lord of streams, the irresistible 
ocean, never forsakes his own magnanimity. I desire 
neither dominion, nor happiness, nor the earth, t nor any 
objectj of enjoyment, nor heaven, nor life. O foremost of 
men, all 1 wish for is that you may not come by falsehood, and 

* Another reading is, — The boon that you had well-pleased conferred. — T . 

f Another reading , — Nor Mithilh's daughter. — T. 

t Another reading is , — Nor any of these worlds. — T. 




Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYlKkNDAM. 



291 



abide by truth. I truly and in good sooth swear before you 
that I cannot, O lord, remain here for a moment longer, 
O my father. Do you bear this grief. I cannot for certain 
act contrary to my promise. Directed by Kaikeyi saying,— 
‘Do you, O RSghava, go to the forest/ I had said, — ‘I will 
go/ — That promise I must accomplish. Do you not, O revered 
one, feel aggrieved. We will abide in the forest abounding 
in mild deer and resounding with the notes of various 
birds. The father is a very God, — even the celestials say 
this. Therefore will I look upon your word in the light of 
divinity. And, O best of monarchs, after the fourteen 
years have been spent, you will see me again by your side, — 
therefore do you banish this grief. Why do you, O foremost 
of men, who will suppress other's grief, undergo this altera- 
tion ? Do you confer upon Bharata this city and this 
kingdom and the earth renounced by me. Doing your 
behest, I will repair to the forest, sojourning there for a long 
time. Staying at the auspicious frontiers, let Bharata barely 
rule this earth furnished with watery expanses, cities and 
forests, when it has been renounced by me. O king, let 
what you have said be as you wish it. I do not, O king, set 
my heart upon any great object of desire, nor do I seek my 
own behoof, as I am bent upon, O you beloved of the good, 
working out your will. O sinless one, you will not therefore 
reap any evil on my account. Associating you with 
untruth, I would hot, O sinless one, wish even for your 
company who are agitated with anxiety,* or this entire 
kingdom, or every object of desire, or the earth, or 
Mithil&’s daughter. Even this is my truthful vow, — let also 
your vow prove true. Living upon fruits and roots in the 
forest, and surveying mountains and tanks and streams 
and graceful trees, I shall be happy on entering the 
forest. Do you cease to lament.'' Thus benetted with 
calamities and exercised with grief and anguish, the king 

* Some texts — Living. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





rImXyana. 



29 2 

embraced his son, — and then deprived of his consciousness, 
fell down on the ground and became motionless. Thereat all 
the queens save that wife of the monarch (Kaikeyi) bewailed 
together; and crying Sumantra also went into a swoon. 
And the place was filled all around with exclamations of 
"O” and "Alas.” 



SECTION XXXV. 



HP HEN shaking his head and sighing again and again, 
pressing palm upon palm and grinding teeth upon teeth, with 
eyes reddened in wrath and an altered complexion, and Sud- 
denly waxing angry and moved with grief, Sumantra witness- 
ing the mental cpndition of Daparatha said, shaking Kaikeyi's 
heart with the sharpened shafts of his speech and piercing her 
mind all over with his harsh words resembling thunderbolts, 
"O worshipful one, since you have forsaken king Daparatha, 
the maintainer of this world and the mobile and the immobile 
that it contains, there is nothing that is incapable of being 
done by you. I consider you the murderess of your husband 
and as one that has finally exterminated one's line ; inasmuch 
as you have by your act afflicted the monarch invincible like 
Indra, firm as a hill, and imperturbable like the deep 
itself. You ought not to bring down your boon-bestowing 
lord and husband Daparatha ; for surely the wish of a 
husband to a wife outweighs a koti of sons. The princes will 
obtain the kingdom one after another according to age ; — 
this custom it is your study to render nugatory even when 
the lord of the Iksh&waku race is still alive. Let your son be 
king; let Bharata rule the earth : we, however, will go where 
goes Rama. No BrShmana will dwell in your dominion 
—such is the ungracious deed you are going to do. [Surely 
we will go the way that is wended by Rama, and what 

The North West Provinces text omits the lines inclosed within brackets. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



AYODHYlKlNDAM . 



m 



happiness, O revered one, will you, forsaken by friends, Br£h- 
manas and the saintly, reap by remaining here, allured by the 
lust of dominion ? And you are going to do such an act Jj 
A wonder it is that 1 perceive, viz, — that the earth hid by a 
character like you is not riven this very day. And why doth 
not the flaming and dreadful censure uttered by the mighty 
Brahmarshis destroy you who are bent upon banishing Rama ? 
Who having hewn a mangoe tree by his axe,tendeth a Nimba ? 
It never turns sweet for him that waters it. Your birth is noble 
indeed ; it is as much so as is your mother's. They say that 
sweet is never extracted from Nimba. I remember what I 
have heard from old men concerning the vicious inclinations 
of your mother. 

Some one intent upon conferring boons conferred an ex- 
cellent one on your father. In virtue of this, that lord of earth 
could understand the import of sounds emitted by all beings, 
and it is in consequence of this that he could understand the 
speech even of birds and beasts. One day as your father 
was lying down, he, understanding the thoughts of a gold- 
hued Jrimbha bird, from its cries, laughed heartily. Thereat 
your mother getting angry, wishing for the noose of death, 
said, — “O kfng, O placid one, I ask you for the reason of 
your laughter.’ The king replied, — ‘O worshipful lady, if 
I unfold unto you the reason of my laugh, then I shall with- 
out doubt die to-day/ But that revered one, your mother, 
again urged Kekaya, saying, — ‘Tell it to me, whether you 
live or die ; for (when I have learnt all about it), you will not 
be able to laugh at me again/ Thus addressed by his beloved 
spouse, that lord of earth Kekaya went to the saint that 
had conferred the boon on him and related unto him every- 
thing faithfully. | Thereupon that boon-giving saint said unto 
the kin ; “Whether this one kills herself or be destroyed, do 
you not, O king reveal it” Hearing these words of his, the 
king well pleased summarily forsook your mother and began 
to divert himself like Kuvera. Even in the same way, you, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




294 



RlMlYANA. 



O you that see only evil, staying in an unrighteous course, 
befouling the king’s sense, endeavour to make him commit 
this wrong. In this connection I remember a saying, viz., — 
men take after their fathers, and women their mothers. Do 
not be so, — do you even accept what the lord of earth says. 
Doing the will of your lord, do you become the refuge of us 
all. Do not incited by evil propensities, make your husband, 
the lord of men endued with the prowess of the celestial 
chief, perpetrate an unrighteous deed. That sinless one 
will not for certain give practical effect to the promise jesting- 
ly made by you. O worshipful one, king D.i9aratha is 
graceful, being furnished with eyes resembling lotuses. Let 
him install his eldest son, RSma generous and able, main* 
taining his own religion — the protector of all men — and 
endued with might. O revered lady, great is the obloquy that 
will spread concerning you, if leaving his royal father, R2ma 
repaireth to the forest. Let therefore Rlghava govern his 
kingdom ; and do you remove your agitation. Surely save 
R&ghava none residing in the kingdom will prove friendly to 
you. On R&ma being installed as the heir-apparent, that best 
of bowmen — king DacarSLtha — will depart for the forest, re- 
membering ancient examples.” Thus in presence of the king, 
Sumantra with clasped palms, with soft yet cutting words 
endeavoured to strike Kaikeyi with regret. But that noble 
dame did not feel any compunction, nor was she touched with 
regret. And the complexion of her countenance remained 
as it was before. 



SECTION XXXVI. 



0:0 

Then that descendant of Ikshw&ku afflicted because of 
his promise, sighing and his heart filled with the vapour be- 
got of sorrow, again addressed Sumantra, saying,—' f “0 chari- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



A yodhfAkIndam. 



295 



oteer, do you speedily marshall the army consisting of the 
four kinds of forces for following RUghava. And let sweet- 
speeched courtezans and opulent traders grace the extensive 
army of the prince. And, giving them immense wealth, do 
you also send with him those that depend on R£ma, as well 
as those with whom he delights to wrestle. And let the 
foremost weapons, and the citizens, and cars, and fowlers 
well acquainted with the forest go in the wake of Kakutstha. 
Killing deer and elephants, and drinking wild honey, and 
beholding various rivers, they will ultimately forget this king- 
dom. And let our granary and treasury follow Rama who 
is to reside in the forest. Performing sacrifices at holy spots, 
and dispensing the prescribed Dakskinas , let R&ma happily 
reside in the forest in the company of saints. The mighty- 
armed Bharata will govern AyodhySL. Therefore, do you 
furnish the auspicious Rlraa with every object of enjoyment. ,, 
When that descendant of Kakutstha said this, Kaikeyi was 
inspired with apprehension : her countenance became blank, 
and her utterance was choked. Losing her complexion 
and agitated with fear, with her countenance fallen, Kaikeyi 
faced the king and said, — “ O righteous one, like unto a 
liquor whose lees alone have been left, Bharata will not receive 
the kingdom tasteless and denuded of all substance / 1 While 
the shameless Kaikeyi was speaking thus sternly, king 
DacarSLtha said unto that one of expansive eyes, — “O worker 
of mischief, why having laid the load upon me, do you tor- 
ment me ? O ignoble one, why did you not ask for this, 
when you did first solicit the boon ?” Hearing these wrath- 
ful words of the king, that beauteous one, Kaikeyi, waxing 
doubly wroth, addressed the monarch, saying, — “Even in 
this line of yours, Sagara deprived his eldest son Asamanja by 
name of the enjoyment of the kingdom. In this way this one 
deserves to go to the forest.” Thus addressed, king Da9a- 
ratha said, — “O fie !” and all present were afflicted with 
shame; but Kaikeyi feigned not to understand all this. Then 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




rAmAvana. 



*96 

a notable, aged, pure*spirited personage held in high esteem 
by the monarch, named Siddh&rtha, addressed Kaikeyi, say- 
ing, — “Asamanja by way of sport catching people on the 
way, used to throw them into the waters of the Sarayu, and 
that wicked-minded wretch made merry over the same. Seeing 
him do so, the citizens in a body, waxing wroth spoke 
unto the monarch, — *0 enhancer of the kingdom’s prosperity, 
do you either banish Asamanja or us.’ To them he 
replied, — ‘Whence is this fear of yours?* Thus asked by 
the monarch, the subjects said, — ‘Through his impudence 
this one of perverted sense by way of diversion throwing our 
sons into the Sarayu, finds extreme delight.* * Hearing these 
words of his subjects, that lord of men, with the intention of 
doing good to them, forsook that mischievous son of his. 
Then swiftly causing a car to be yoked, he said unto his 
men, — ‘This one is to be banished for life in proper garb 
along with his wife.’ Thereupon that worker of iniquity 
went to the forest and went about seeing mountain 
fastnesses. Thus did the virtuous king Sagara renounce 
his son. But what offence has R&ma committed that he 
is to be banished ? We do not find any fault whatever in 
R&ghava. Rare is his fault even like the spot on the Moon. 
Or it may be, O exalted lady, that you perceive some fault 
in R2Lghava, — Do you, if so, unfold it; and then let R&ma 
be banished. But the renunciation of the honest ever con- 
stant in a righteous course, in consequence of its being 
opposed to virtue, destroys the splendour of Sakra himself. 
Therefore, O noble one, cease to persevere in this, for what 
good would the marring of Rama’s good fortune bring you ? 
And, O you of a fair countenace, you will by such a course, 
escape odium.’* Hearing SiddhSrtha’s words, the king, his 
voice waxing exceedingly feeble, addressed Kaikeyi in words 
surcharged with emotion, — “O Personation of sin, thou 
relishest not this speech. Thou knowest not either thy own 
good or mine. This wicked endeavour of thine, O thou that 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHYlKlNDAM. 



*97 



rtxivest after harm, which thou puttest forth adopting a 
narrow path, is surely divorced from the course of the good. 
Forsaking my kingdom, forsaking happiness and treasures, 

I will to-day follow R2ma. Do thou with Bharata for the ' 
king, forever enjoy dominion according to thy heart’s desire.” 



SECTION XXXVI I . 



Hearing the words of that worthy, Rima conversant 
with modesty, humbly addressed Da^aratha, saying, — “What 
O king, have I, that am renouncing everything and am going 
to dwell in the forest subsisting on what the forest yields, 
to do with a following? Of what avail is a person’s 
attachment for the tether of a goodly elephant, when the 
elephant itself is renounced by him ? Thus it is with 
me, O foremost of righteous ones. What shall I do with 
the army, O lord of men? I will confer everything oa 
Bharata. Let them bring me a vesture of bark, and for 
me who will go to the forest and reside there for 
fourteen years, bring a hoe and a basket.” Thereupon 
Kaikeyi herself brought a bark dress and that shameless 
one said unto R&ghava in the presence of all, — “Do you wear 
this.” On this, that foremost of men taking those two 
pieces of bark from Kaikeyi, left his fine attire and put on 
the ascetic garb. And Lakshmana also, renouncing his 
choice raiment, put on the dress of an anchoret before his 
father. Then Sit* clad in silk apparel, eying the ascetic 
covering meant for her, became agitated, like a doe at sight 
of a noose. And afflicted with shame, that one graced 
with auspicious marks, J&naki, sorrowfully took from 
Kaikeyi the Ku$a and bark ; and with tears flooding her 
eyes, that one cognizant of virtue and having her gaze 

3 * 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




rAmAiana. 



29 8 

ever fixed upon it, thus addressed her lord resembling th* 
king of the Gandharbas, — “How do the ascetics dwelling ia 
the woods put on their dress ?*' Saying this, Sita, ill at ea 
became embrassed. And putting on one piece on her 
neck and holding the other in her hand, the daughter oi 
Janaka, feeling uneasy, stood overpowered with shame 
Thereupon that best of righteous persons, R3ma, peedilv 
coming up to her, fastened the monastic garb over Site's silk 
attire. Beholding Rama fastening that goodly garb on Sita 
the females of the inner apartment began to shed tears. And 
waxing exceedingly aggrieved, they spoke unto Rama flaming 
in effulgence : — “Child, do not take this virtuous one to the 
forest. So long as you will reside in the forest in accordance 
with the wishes of your father, we shall behold her ; and by 
this means let our lives attain their object, O lord. O son tak- 
ing Lakshmana for your help, go you to the forest. This 
auspicious one does not deserve to live in the woods like an 
ascetic. O son, grant our prayer. Let the fair Sita remain. Ever 
steady in virtue, you do not yourself intend to stay here.’' 
Hearing these words, Da^aratha’s son tied the dress on Siia 
having a similar character with himself. When she had put on 
the upper and under garments, the preceptor of the king. 
Vasistha, his voice choked with the vapour of sorrow, dissuad- 
ing Sita, said unto Kaikeyi, — “O thou whose desires outrun 
thy sense of honor, O thou of perverted understanding, 
O befouk-r of thy line, deceiving the monarch, thou stayest 
not within the pale of the promise. O thou bereft of good 
behavior, that noble lady, Sita, should not go to the forest 
SitS will occupy RSma’s seat. Of all those that marry, the 
wife is the other) soul. Sita will govern the earth, as she is 
Rama’s self. But if Vaidehi goes to the forest with Rama, we 
will follow him, and the inhabitants of the city will also repair 
thither. And the warders of the inner apartment, and the 
people of the kingdom and the city taking with them their 
necessaries and servants will accompany RSghava and his 






Digitized by CjOOQle 



avodnyAkAmdam. 



*99 

wife. And Bhar.tta and Satrughna wearing ascetic clothes and 
ranging the forest will live like their elder brother resident in 
the woods. Then alone thou of vile ways and intent upon 
harming the people wilt govern this empty earth deserted 
by the inhabitants, along with the trees. That can never be 
a kingdom where R3ma is not the monarch, and that forest 
where Rama will reside will flourish into a monarchy. Bhar- 
ata never wishes to govern a kingdom that has not been 
conferred upon him by his father; nor, if he has really been 
begotten by the monarch, will he any further act by you as a 
son. Even if you leaving the earth fly unto the air, that one 
cognizant of th£ character of his ancestry, will never act 
otherwise. Therefore although intent on advancing your 
son, you have really brought about his injury. There exists 
not a person in the world that is not partial to R5ma. O 
Kaikeyi, do you to-day behold beasts and snakes and 
birds journeying in the wake of RSma, and even the 
trees stand with their heads turned towards him. Do 
you, O noble lady, removing tire ascetic guise, confer 
elegant ornaments on your daughtcr-in-Iaw, for such a 
dress suits not this one.'' Saying this Vasistha prevented' 
Kaikeyi. "O daughter of king Kekaya, you have asked for 
the abode of R5ma in the woods $ and decked out in 
ornaments let Sit§ daily engaged in adorning herself, reside 
in the forest with RSghava. And let the daughter of the 
king go to the forest, surrounded by excellent cars and- 
servants, and taking with her attires and other necessary 
things. When you demanded the (fulfilment of the) promise, 
you had not your eye on Sita. M When that foremost of 
Bi&hmanas, that preceptor of the king possessed of unparal- 
cUcd potency, had said this, SitS, desirous of serving her 
beloved lord, did not turn away from the ascetic dress- 
(presented by Kaikeyi.) 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




JO# 



RlRllrANA. 



SECTION XXXVIII. 



HEN SitS, having a husband although seeming as d 
she had none, was putting on the ascetic guise r the peopk 
got into a wrath and exclaimed, “O Da^aratha, fie on you* 
Aggrieved at the uproar that arose there in consequence, 
the lord of earth banished from his heart all regard for life, 
virtue, and fame. And sighing hot, that descendant of 
Ikshwaku spoke unto that wife of hrs, saying,— “O Kaikeyi 
Sita deserves not to go in a Ku9a dress. Tender, and youth- 
ful, and worthy of happiness, she is by no means capable 
of living in the forest. My spiritual guide has spoken the 
truth. Whom has this one injured that, being the daughter 
of the forenmet pf kings, she like a female ascetic, wearing 
a meagre In the presence of alh will (repair to the woods 
and) remain there like a beggar destitute of everything ? Let 
Janaka's daughter leave off her ascetic guise. This is 
not the promise that I had made to you before. Let the 
princess go to the forest in comfort, furnished with all sorts 
of gems. My sands run out ; by me hath this cruel promise been 
made with an oath. But this (exile of Silk) has been thought 
of by you through your ignorance! I,et it not, however, 
consume you like a bamboo flower destroying the bamboo. 
If, O wicked woman, Rama has happened to do thee some- 
thing unbeautiful, what wrong, O base wretch, bas Vaidebi 
done thee in the world ? Of eyes expanded like those of a 
doe, endued with a mild temperament, and virtuous, what 
harm has Janaka's daughter done thee. Surely, O nefarious 
one, the banishment of Rama is enough for thee. Why then 
dost thou bend thy mind to perpetrate these atrocious sins r 
O noble dame, having heard you asking for the banishment 
of Rama, who had at first been intended by me for being 
installed, and who came here afterwards, I had promised you 
(|>i* exile alone.) But since, going beyond that promise of 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHlXKlNDAM. 



301 



mine, you behold MithSla’s daughter dressed in mendicant 
garb, surely you wish to find your way to hell.” Thus com- 
missioned to the forest, R3ma who was seated sealing his 
lips, said,— * 0 righteous one, this my mother is aged and 
famous and of a lofty spirit. May she not meet with improper 
treatment at your hands ! It behoves you, O bestower of 
boons, to show greater honor to her when she shall be depriv- 
ed of me and be plunged into a sea of grief and afflicted 
with unprecedented woe. O you comparable unto the mighty 
Indra, you should so behave with my mother smitten with my 
separation, that exercised by grief in consequence of my resi- 
dence in the forest, she may not, renouncing life, repair to 
the mansions of Yama.” 



SECTION xxxix. 



Hearing Rama’s words, and seeing him dressed like an 
ascetic, the king in the midst of his wives was deprived of 
his senses. And burning in grief, the king could not eye 
R&ghava, nor seeing him could that one of afflicted mind 
answer anything. Then remaining unconscious for a while, 
the mighty-armed lord of earth oppressed by grief began 
to bewail, thinking of R&ma. “I conclude that formerly 1 
deprived many a cow of her calf, and took the life of many a 
creature, and it is for this that the present calamity lvas be- 
fallen me. (I infer) that life never departs from the body 
unless the time comes, for although sore tried by Kaikeyi, 
my life does not go out of me, and for I can see before me 
this one resembling fire, clad in the dress of an ascetic, 
having left his fine vesture. These people are in trouble in 
consequence of Kaikeyi alone striving by help of this 
craftiness to secure her interest.” Having said these words, 
Dagaratha, his semes overpowered by the vapour of sorrow, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




rXmX van a. 



302 

exclaimed "Rama !" and could not proceed further. Then 
soon regaining consciousness, the lord of earth with tearful 
eyes, addressed Sumuntra, saying, — "Yoking a ridings car 
with excellent horses, do you come hither ; and take the 
exalted one to the south of the kingdom. The virtuous and 
heroic Rama is being banished by his father and mother. 
Even this methinks will be asserted as the fruit of the 
virtues possessed by the pious." Receiving the mandate of 
the sovereign, Sumantra endued with fleet vigour, yoking 
a car adorned with horses, came there. Then the charioteer 
with joined hands announced to the prince that the car 
adorned with gold was ready, yoked with excellent horses. 
The king, versed in time and place, and pure, speedily sum- 
moning his treasurer, said unto him these words firmly, — 
"Do you without delay bring unto Vaidehi excellent and 
costly attires and noble ornaments, counting these (ten and 
four) years.” Thus desired by the foremost of men, that 
officer repairing to the treasury, procuring all those, speed- 
ily presented them to Sit5. Thereupon that pure-sprung 
one, Vaidehi, ordered to the forest, adorned her goodly 
limbs with those rare ornaments. And thus decked out, 
Vaidehi graced that chamber like the effulgence of the 
Sun irradiating the welkin with his rays. Then embrac- 
ing with her arms Mithil&’s daughter of noble behaviour, 
and smelling the crown of her head, Sill's mother-in- 
law said, — "Those women that although having always 
been carefully tended by their husbands, do not regard 
them during the incident of adversity, are in this world 
reckoned as unchaste. — Even this is the nature of women : 
having formerly tasted happiness (at the hands of their 
husbands), they, on the accession of an inconsiderable 
misfortune, take them to task, — nay, forsake them utterly. 
Those women that are untruthful, unmindful, of evil ways, 
heartless, intent on unrighteous acts, and whose love is 
evanescent, are unchaste, Neither lineage, nor benefit, nor 



Digitized by 



Google 



A YODHrXKANDAM. 



303 



learning, nor gift, nor forbearance of faults, can secure the 
hearts of females, — surely their hearts are unstable. But 
chaste women of good character, abiding in truth, acting in 
accordance with the precepts of superiors, and maintaining 
the dignity of their race, single out their lords as the prime 
means of compassing their spiritual welfare. Therefore 
although my son is going to be banished to the woods, you 
should by no means disregard him. Whether he be wealthy or 
poor, he is unto you like a god.” Hearing her mother-in- 
law’s words fraught with virtue and interest, Sit& facing that 
lady, said with joined palms, — “I will do all that the noble 
one says. I know how I should act by my husband. I have 
heard all about that (from my parents.; The worshipful one 
ought not to place me on the same footing with unrighteous 
persons. As brightness doth not depart from the moon, so 
1 cannot swerve from virtue. The Vin& without strings 
does not sound ; and the car without wheels does not move, — 
so although having an hundred sons, a woman without her 
husband cannot attain happiness. The Father gives in mea- 
sure, the father and the son give in measure, — but who does 
not worship that bestower of ‘riches fineless' — the husband ? 
O exalted one, having learnt from my superiors the principal 
as well the minor duties, shall I disregard (my lord)? A hus- 
band is a deity unto the wife.” Hearing Sita’s words which 
went directly to the heart, Kau^alya endued with purity of 
spirit, out of fulness of bliss and bale suddenly shed tears.Then 
with joined hands that foremost of virtuous ones addressed his 
mother, who, duly honored by all, was seated in the midst of 
his other mothers, saying, — “O mother, without indulging in 
grief, you should minister unto my father ; and the term of 
ray abode in the woods will shortly expire. You will find 
these five and nine years pass away as if in a sleep. Then 
again, getting me, you will see me surrounded by my friends 
and relatives.” Having spoken out his mind unto his mother, 
Rfima attentively eyed his three hundred and fifty mothers. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




304 



rAmAvana. 



And with joined hands Dafar&tha’s son spake words fraught 
with virtue unto his mothers afflicted like Kau9aly& herself. 
“If I have said anything harsh to you in consequence of 
familiarity, or done any wrong through ignorance, do you 
forgive the same. 1 salute you all.” These calm words of 
Raghava informed with peity were heard by the ladies over- 
whelmed with grief. As Raghava was speaking thus, there 
arose a loud wail proceeding from those wives of that chief 
of men, like unto the cries of Kraunchis. And the abode 
of D^aratha which formerly resounded with murajas, 
panavas , meghas* was now filled with cries of distress and 
lamentations. 



SECTION XL. 



Then exceedingly distressed, Rima, Siti and Laksh- 
mana, bowing down unto the king, circumambulated him. 
Then with the king’s permission, the righteous R&ghava, 
stupified with sorrow, in company with Sit5, paid respects 
unto his mother. Following his brother, Lakshmana saluted 
Kau£a1y& ; then he again took hold of his mother SumitrJL’s 
feet. As the son of Sumitri was thus engaged in 
lionoriug his mother, his mother smelling the crown 
of his head, thus spoke unto the mighty-armed Laksh- 
mana, — “Although attached unto thy friends here, thou 
hast my permission to go to the forest. When R&ma 
shall have gone (to the woods), do not, O son, show 
any negligence unto him. O sinless one, whether in 
prosperity or in adversity, even this one fc is } thy way. That 
a younger brother should follow his elder is in this world the 
duty of the righteous. These are the legitimate duties ever 
observed by this race— charity, initiation into’sacrifice, ‘and 

* Musical instruments. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



A YODHYlKlNDAM. 



3°5 



renunciation of the body in the field of battle. Do thou con- 
sider Rftma as Da£aratha, and Janaka’s own-begotten as my- 
self ; do thou regard Ayodhya as a wilderness, — go my son, 
at thy sweet pleasure.” Having thus spoken unto that dear 
descendant of Raghu, who had made up his mind (to journey 
to the forest), Sumitri again and again said unto him, — 
“Go ! Go !” Then like unto Matali addressing Vasava, that 
one understanding humility, Sumantra, with joined hands 
humbly said unto Kakutstha, — “O illustrious prince, good 
betide you : do you ascend the car. O R&ma, I will speedily 
take you to wherever you will tell me. You will have to 
spend fourteen years in the forest, and your stay must com- 
mence from this very day. So the noble lady has 
ordered.” Then having adorned her person, that best of her 
sex, Sita, with a glad heart ascended the car resembling the 
sun. Counting the term of their stay in the woods, her 
father-in-law furnished Siti following her lord with attires and 
ornaments. And then he placed in front of the car various 
weapons, coats of mail, a basket bound in hide and a hoe. 
At length the brothers R&ma and Lakshmana swiftly ascend- 
ed the flaming car garnished with gold. And seeing them 
with Sita for the third, mounted, Sumantra drove the car 
yoked with goodly horses resembling the wind in celerity. 
On Raghava having left for the forest to stay there for a 
long period, the men and beasts within the city were deprived 
of their senses (by grief). And in the city there arose a 
mighty tumult in consequence of the hurrying of people, the 
elephants waxing mad and furious, and the neighings of 
horses. And the entire city containing young and old, ex- 
tremely afflicted, rushed after RSma, like persons oppressed 
with the heat of the sun rushing towards water. 

At his side and back, the people bending forward with 
their faces covered with the vapour of grief, and sighing 
hard, said unto the charioteer, — "O charioteer, rein in the 
horses,— do thou proceed softly. We will see the counten- 

39 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




jo6 



RAmA VAN a. 



a „ce of Rama, which we shall never see again. Surely the 
heart of Rama’s mother is made of iron, for .t does not 
burst on witnessing her sou resembling Skanda repairing 
to the forest. Vaidehi, attaining her desire follows 
husband, like a shadow-attached to virtue, she does not 
forsake him even as the Sun forsakes not meru. O 
Lak hmana, you are blessed, since you will serve your 
god-like brother ever speaking fair. This design of yours 
* ere at • this is your mighty good fortune; this is 
the way ’to heaven that you are following him.” Saying 
this, they could not supress their fears ; and the men 
followed the beloved descendant of Ikshwaku. Then tie 
king, his senses overcome by grief, surrounded by hi. dis- 
tressed wives, went out of his house, saying -' l will behold 
tnv dear son.” He heard before him a mighty no.se proceed- 
ing from weeping women.like unto the roars of she-elephants, 

when a great elephant has been taken captive. Thereupon 

Rama’s father, the graceful Kakutstha, became shorn of Ins 
splendour, like unto the full-moon enveloped at the appointed 
time during the eclipse. Then the auspicious son of Da^ara- 
tha of soul -incapable of being comprehended, ordered 
the charioteer, saying, -“Do thou proceed more speedily.” 

Rama saying unto the charioteer, - ‘Go,” and the people. - 

“Stay ” thus desired on the way, the charioteer could not 
act both ways at once. As the mighty-armed Rama proceed- 
ed the dust of the earth raised by the car-wheels were laid 
bv' the tears of the citizens showering down. And in con- 
sequence of Raghava’s departure, the entire city filled with 
despair, and uttering with their senses lost exclamations of 
“Oh” and “Alas,” became exceedingly afflicted. And the 
tears begot of heart’s grief that flowed from the eyes of the 
females, resembled rain-drops scattered around from lotuses 
shaken by the movements of fish. And beholding the citi- 
zens absorbed in one thought, the auspicious monarch fell 
down in grief like a tree whose roots have been severed. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHl lKlNDAM. Z o T 

Then seeing the sovereign senseless and stricken with 
exceeding sorrow, the multitudes at the rear of Rama broke 
out into a loud tumult. And seeing the king weeping aloud 
with the inmates of the inner apartment, some exclaiming 
# ‘Oh Rama/' and others, "O Rama's mother," began to bewail. 
Then turning back, Rama saw that his sorrow-stricken 
and bewildered father along with his mother, was following 
his track. As a colt fastened in a snare cannot see its mother, 
so R5ma fastened in the bonds of virtue could not look at his 
mother openly. And seeing his parents deserving of comfort 
and worthy of going in a carriage, going on foot, Rama said 
unto the charioteer, — “Go thou swiftly." And that foremost 
of men was incapable of bearing the looks of his father and 
mother, like unto an elephant afflicted with the hook, (not 
being able to look at what is placed on its back.) 

R§ma's mother rushed after him like a cow having a calF 
which has been fettered, rushing towards the fold, for the 
purpose of seeing it. R&ma beheld his mother Kau^alya run- 
ning after the car, bewailing aloud, — "Rama, Rama, Ah Sit5, 
Lakshmana," shedding tears for Rama, Lakshmana and Sit&, 
and appearing as if she had been dancing incessantly. The 
king exclaimed, — "Stay," Raghava said, —"On, On.” Suman- 
tra’s mind vascillated like that of one placed between 
two hosts burning to encounter each other. R&ma said unto 
him, — "When taxed .by the monarch (on your return), you- 
will say, 'I did not hear you.* But delay will impart me 
terrible pain." Thereupon, doing RSma’s bidding, the chario- 
teer, telling the people to desist, made the horses already 
coursing, run faster. The retainers of the king stopped 
after circumambulating Rama, but their minds did not 
turn back. But the others did not return either bodily 
or mentally. Then the courtiers said unto that mighty 
monarch, Da 9 aratha, — "He that is expected back should 
not be followed far." Hearing their words, the king 
endued with every virtue, with his body covered with per- 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




3oS 



RlMlYANA. 



spiration and his countenance woe-begone, and exceedingly 
distressed, stopped short and stood along with his wife 
looking at his son. 



SECTION X L I . 

0:0 

AV HEN that foremost of men had gone out of the city 
with joined hands, there arose a chorus of cries proceeding 
from the females residing in the inner apartment. “Where 
goeth he that was the stay and refuge of the friendless, the 
feeble, and the helpless ? He that although falsely accused, 
used not to be moved by anger, who pacified every enraged 
person by renouncing things calculated to fan anger and who 
felt equally for all, where goeth he ? Where goeth that 
highly energetic and magnanimous one who conducted him- 
self with us as he did with his mother Kau^alyS? Afflicted 
by Kaikeyi and commissioned by the monarch unto the woods, 
where goeth the deliverer of these people — of the entire 
world ? Ah ! the senseless monarch is sending to the woods 
the stay of all creatures — the righteous and truthful Rama.” 
Thus all the queens, oppressed with grief, burst out into 
lamentations like kine bereft of calves, and loud was the 
sound of their wailing. Hearing the loud tumult of lamenta- 
tion in the inner apartment, the lord of earth burning in grief 
for his son was striken with sorrow. And oblations unto the 
fire had not been offered ; and the Sun set ; and elephants 
forsook their forage ; and the kine did not suckle their 
calves. Trisanku, Lohit&nga, Vrihashpati, Budha and the 
other Grahas getting at the Moon, remained with fierce 
aspects. The stars are shorn of their brightness ; the Grahas 
deprived of sheen ; and Vi9&kh& appeareth enveloped 
in haze. And clouds driven by the wind resembled the 
sea mounting the welkin ; and the city shook on RSma 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHVlKlNDAM . 



309 



having departed for the forest. And the cardinal points are 
distressed, and appear enveloped in darkness. And no 
planet or star is to be seen. And all of a sudden the citizens 
have been striken with poverty : and no one turns his 
thoughts to eating or drinking. And ceaselessly burning in 
grief and heaving sighs, the people in Ayodhya rage at the 
monarch. And with their faces washed in tears, the 
wayfarers betoken no delight, but all are being exercised 
with grief. And the cool air does not blow, and no moon of 
mild appearance is seen, and no sun heats the world, all 
the entire Earth is overwhelmed with woe. And sons depend 
not upon their parents, hurbands on their wives, and brothers 
on brothers ; and all forsaking each other, think of R&ma 
only. And deprived of sense, and oppressed by the load of 
sorrow, the friends of Rama forsook their rest. Like the 
Earth with her mountains bereft of Purandara, Ayodhya, 
bereft of R&ma, shook, agitated by fear and grief ; and the 
citizens with elephants and warriors uttered exclamations of 
distress. 



SECTION x l 1 1 . 



So long as he could see the dust raised by the car of 
R5ma setting out for the forest, so long that best of the 
Ikshwaku race did not turn his eyes from that direction. 
And so long as the king could discover his exceedingly 
virtuous and favorite son, so long he raised himself (on his 
toes) on the earth wdth the view of beholding him. And when 
the ruler of earth could no longer perceive even the dust 
raised by R£ma’s car, then pierced with sorrow, and in 
heaviness of heart, he fell down to the ground. Then 
(raising him up), Kau9alya held his right arm and walked 
with him, while the slender-waisted Kaikeyi walked by his 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RAmA}'ANA. 



310 

left. Endowed with a sense of justice and with virtue 
and humility, the king [with afflicted senses steadily eyeing 
Kaikeyi, thus spake unto her, — “O Kaikeyi, that hast 
decided for following sin, do thou not touch my person, — nor 
do I wish to see thee. Thou art no wife of mine — not even 
a maid-servant of a friend sharing his good graces. I am 
none to those that subsist on thy favour, nor are they any- 
thing to me. I renounce thee who solely seekest thy interest 
and hast abandoned virtue. I renounce all the advantages 
pertaining either to this world or the next which I am entitled 
to by virtue of having obtained thy hand and having made 
thee circumambulate the sacrifical fire. If Bharata is satisfied 
with receiving this entire kingdom, let not what he spends 
on account of my funeral obsequies find its way to me.' 
Then raising the lord of men covered with dust, the noble 
Kau^alyS pierced with grief, stopped (along with the 
monarch). The righteous one remembering Raghava repfented 
himself, as if he had slain a BrSlimana through inordinate 
desire, or as if he had placed his hand in fire. And having 
stopped again and again, the visage of the monarch lamenting 
on beholding the trark of the car, appeared dim like 
the Moon invaded by Rahu. And stricken with grief, 
he lamented, remembering his beloved son ; and think- 
ing that by this time he had reached the precincts 
of the city, he broke out into the following, — “On the 
way are traced the foot prints of those foremost of 
bearers that are carrying my son away ; but that magna- 
nimous one I do not find. And that meritorious son 
of mine, who, doubed with sandal, used to rest his head 
pleasantly upon a pillow, fanned by beauteous damsels 
decked in ornaments, will to-day surely take refuge 
underneath a tree, and lay his head on a wooden plank 
or a stone. Covered with dust, he heaving sighs will rise 
from the ground in sad guise, like a leader of she-elephants 
rising from the side of a mountain. The rangers of the 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




AYODHYlKlNDAM . 



3 XI 

woods will now see the long-armed Rama resembling the 
lord himself of the worlds, rising from the ground and going 
like one forlorn. And that one so dearly loved by Janaka, 
worthy of being constantly ministered unto with comforts, 
is to-day going to the forest, fatigued in consequence of 
having been pierced with thorns. Unacquainted with the 
forest, she is certainly afflicted with fright on hearing the 
deep roars of ferocious beasts, capable of making one's hair 
stand erect. O Kaikeyi, do thou realize thy desire, — do thou 
becoming a widow, rule this kingdom. Without that best of 
men I cannot live." Thus lamenting, the king surrounded 
by the multitude, like one that had performed his bath after 
death, entered that best of cities filled with people enfeebled 
and smitten with grief, with its streets thined of men and its 
stalls closed. And beholding that entire city, with his mind 
fixed upon Rama, the king lamenting, like unto the sun enter- 
ing clouds, entered that city like unto an unagitated sea rid 
of serpents by Suparna,* the city without RSma or Lakshmana 
or Sita. Then with tears in his eyes, the lord of earth, 
lamenting, in unintelligible accents said these sad and broken 
words, — “Do you speedily take me to the room of Rama's 
mother, Kauyalya ; for in no other place shall I find rest 
for my heart." When the king had spoken thus, the ushers 
taking him to Kaugalya’s chamber, made him lie down in 
lowly plight. And having entered Kau9aly2L’s apartment, 
the king having laid himself on the bed, was overwhelmed 
with emotion. And the king surveyed the mansion deprived 
of his two sons as well as his daughter-in-law, like unto 
the welkin deprived of the Moon. Beholding this, the 
puissant sovereign raising up his arm, burst out into 
lamentations, saying, — “Ah j Rama, thou forsakest us both ! 
Ah me ! surely those blessed people are happy, who having 
passed this gap of time, will behold Rama returned and will 
embrace him." Then when the night had come like unto his 

* Lit, f air-feathered, a name of Garura . — 7\ 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





312 



rAmAvana. 



own fatal night, Dasaratha at mid-night addressed Kau^alyi 
saying, — “I do not perceive thee, O Kau^alya. Do thoc 
touch me with thy hand. My sight having followed R^roa 
doth not return yet.” Then seeing that foremost of mer 
absorbed in the contemplation of R&ma, that noble dame sa: 
by him, and afflicted with greater grief, began to indulge ir 
sorrow,* sighing heavily. 



SECTION X LI I t . 



Then seeing the king lying down stupified with grief, 
Kau9ily§. aggrieved for her son, spake k unto the lord of 
earth, saying, — “O best of men, having vented her venom 
upon Raghava, the crooked Kaikeyi will gojabout like a sbe- 
serpent that has cast off her slough. And that fortunate 
one having by her endeavours attained her end, will frighten 
me the more like a wicked serpent in one's house. If Rama 
had stayed in this city subsisting himself by alms, or had 
I made my son as Kaikeyi’s slave, even that would have 
been preferable (before his retirement to the woods). Like 
unto the sacrificial share cast unto the Rakshasas by the 
sacrificers on the occasions of Parvas, that weilder of the 
bow, the mighty-armed Rama, gifted with the gait of the 
prince of elephants, cast off by Kaikeyi, takes refuge in the 
forest in company with his wife and Lakshmana. Despatched 
by you to the woods at the command of Kaikeyi, to what a 
plight will they, not inured to the privations of a forest-life, 
be reduced ! And bereft of elegant apparel, how will they 
of tender years, exiled in this time of enjoyment, pass their 
lives in misery, subsisting on fruits and roots ! Will such 
a time present itself now that my grief removed and my 

* Another text reads vinisnasantan t joining it to twrtndrvm— foremost of 
men. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





ATODHYlRlNDAM. 



3*3 



desire attained, I shall here behold Raghava along with his 
wife and brother? When, hearing that those heroes have 
come, will Ayodhya adorned with standards and garlands, 
attain fame, with her populace filled with joy ? When, 
seeing those foremost of men returned from the forest, will 
the city overflow with delight, like the ocean on the occasion 
ofaParva? When will the mighty-armed hero enter the 
city of AyodhyS, placing SitS before him on the car, — like 
unto a bull having his bovine mate before him ? When will 
people by thousands shower fried paddy upon my sons on 
the road, as those repressors of foes will enter the city ? 
When shall I behold those (two) wearing burnished ear-rings, 
entering Ayodhya, placing before them their weapons and 
swords, like unto two hills furnished with their summits ? 
When accepting flowers from girls and fruits from Br&hmanas, 
will they, filled with delight, go round the palace ? When 
with his intelligence ripened by time, although resembling a 
celestial in age, will that righteous-souled one come here, 
rejoicing people like a Trivarsha ?* Doubtless, O hero, 
formerly of vile ways that I was, I had cut off the paps of 
kine and thus prevented their calves hungering after their 
mothers' milk, from drinking it. And it is for this sin that, 
O foremost of men, have I, attached to my son, been forcibly 
deprived of him by Kaikeyi, like a cow deprived of her calf 
by a lion. Having an only son, I dare not live without him 
endowed with every virtue and versed in every branch of 
learning. Not seeing my beloved son and the mighty 
Lakshmana, I cannot live at all. As in summer the divine 
Sun furnished with fierce rays burns this earth, even so this 
raging fire of grief on account of my son consumes me." 

* Three consecutive showers , favourable to the crops. — T. 



A* 



Digitized by Google 




. 3H 



RlMlVANA. 



SECTION XLIV. 



jf\.S that best of ladies, KausalyS, was thus lamenting 
Sumitra ever abiding in virtue, spake unto her these words 
consistent with righteousness, — "0 worshipful one, your son 
is crowned with all qualities, — and is the best of men* WTiy 
then do you bewail thus, or weep bitterly ? Since, O revered 
one, renouncing the kingdom, your mighty son wendeth (to 
the woods) with the view of fulfiling the intention of his higb- 
souled and truthful sire, the worthy Rama staying in the duty 
that is completely observed by the good and the performance 
of which always bringeth welfare in the next world, 
should by no means be lamented. And that sinless one, 
Lakshmana, kind unto all creatures, will minister unto Rlma 
in the best way possible,— and this is to the advantage of 
that high-souled one, And experiencing the hardships that 
come of living in the forest, Vaidehi deserving of happiness 
follows your righteous son. And what is wanting unto that 
maintainer of all, your son of subdued senses, intent upon 
truth and the observance of vows, who is spreading his ban- 
ner of fame over the world ? Acquainted with RSma's mani- 
fest purity and high magnanimity, the Sun himself will not 
dare burn his body with his rays. And issuing from the 
woods at all hours, the delicious air impregnated with heat 
and cold will serve Raghava. And when he will lie down at 
night, the Moon touching him with his beams and embracing 
him even like his own father, will gladden his heart. That 
hero of mighty energy on whom BrahmSL had conferred celes- 
tial weapons, seeing that foremost of the Dinavas, the son of 
Timidhwaja, slain in battle, — that tiger-like one, relying on 
the native strength of his arms, will fearlessly abide in the 
forest as if in his own home. And why should not the earth 
remain in the sway of him coming within the range of whose 
arms enemies find destruction ? Considering RSma’s grace, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHFlKlNDAM. 



3^5 



heroism and auspiciousness t ftliere cannot be any doubt that) 
returning from the forest, he will speedily regain his own 
kingdom. He is the sun of the sun, the lord of the lord, — he 
is the auspiciousness of prime auspiciousness, the fame of 
fame, the forbearance of forbearance, the god of the gods,— 
and the foremost of creatures. What evil qualities, O noble 
lady, will be perceived in him, whether he remains in the city 
or in the forest ? And that best of men, RSLma, will soon be 
installed in the kingdom, in company with these three — 
the Earth, Vaidehi, and the goddess of victory. Although 
overwhelmed with grief, the people of AyodhyS, seeing that 
noble unvanquished one retiring to the woods clad in Kuca 
and bark, are shedding tears begot of sorrow ; yet accompani- 
ed by that Lakshmi, what is there that is incapable of being 
attained by him ? And what is there that is incapable of 
being obtained by him before whom goeth that foremost of 
bowmen himself bearing arrows, swords and other weapons ? 
You will again see him returned from the forest. O exalted 
one, chase your grief and sadness. I tell you this truly. O 
blameless one, you will again, O auspicious lady, see your 
son, like unto the new-risen moon, paying homage unto 
your feet with his head. And again seeing him returned and 
crowned with great auspiciousness, you will speedily shed 
the dew of delight. O noble lady, do not grieve or lament. 
Evil cannot touch R&ma. You will soon behold your sot* 
along with Siti and Lakshmana. O sinless one, it is for you 
to console these people. Why then, O revered one, do you 
suffer your heart to be thus overpowered? O eminent one, 
you ought not to bewail, inasmuch as RSghava is your 
son. In this world there is not another residing in honesty 
that is superior to Rama. Beholding your son surrounded 
by his friends, bowing unto you,* you will soon shed blissful 
tears, even like a rain-cloud. And soon will your son 
conferring boons, returning (to this place), press your feet 
with those soft and plump hands of his. And even as a 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RlMlYANA. 



316 

chain of clouds speaks unto a hill, you will speak unto your 
worshipful and heroic son, surrounded by his friends, 
bowing unto you.” Having thus addressed R£ma’s mother 
and inspired her with hope in various words, the noble and 
pleasant and blameless Sumitra, clever in speech, paused. 
Hearing those words of Lakshmana’s mother, that wife ot 
the best of men, R&ma's mother, had her sorrow destroyed 
in her person, even like an autumnal cloud surcharged with 
slight rain. 



SECTION X L V . 



The people, who yarned after Rama having truth for 
prowess, followed him repairing to the forest. Even when 
the king in the interests of his son had with much ado 
restrained himself, these, following Rama’s car, did not desist 
That illustrious one crowned with every perfection was dear 
unto the inhabitants of Ayodhy 5 t like unto the full moon 
himself. Although besought by the subjects, the truthful 
Kakutstha having pledged his word unto his father, kept 00 
going to the forest. And affectionately eying them as if 
drinking them with his sight, Rama touchingly addressed 
those subjects as if they were his own, — “The love and 
regard which the inhabitants of AyodhyS have for me, let 
them, for pleasing me, extend in full measure towards 
Bharata. That enhancer of Kaikeyi’s delight bearing an 
auspicious character, will duly compass your happiness and 
welfare. Aged by virtue of his wisdom, although young in 
years, and mild albeit furnished with heroic virtue, that 
remover of fear will make a fit ruler for ye. Crowned 
with every regal virtue and selected as the heir-apparent 
(by the monarch), he is more meritorious by far than I am. 
It behoves ye to obey the order of your master. And seeking 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHllKhVDAM. 



S*7 



my good, it behoves ye to act so that when I shall have 
gone to the forest, the king may not grieve.” But as Da 9 a- 
ratha’s son was bringing home to the people that their duty 
lay in obeying the royal mandate, they desired that even 
Rama should rule them. And Rama in company with Sumi- 
tr&'s son attracted the inhabitants of the city subdued by his 
virtues, who stood with tears in their eyes. And the three 
kinds of the twice born ones, viz., those old by virtue, respec- 
tively, of age, wisdom, and ascetic energy, the old folks with 
their heads shaking through length of years, — cried from a 
distance, — ‘*0 ye fleet coursers boasting of exalted extraction 
that bear Rama away, do ye desist, — do not go ; do ye do 
even what is for the good of your master. And more parti- 
cularly being creatures furnished with ears, do ye, ye horses, 
knowing our prayer, desist. And pure of spirit and heroic 
and ever firm in noble promises, that master of yours should 
in justice be carried (unto the city) and not unto the forest 
away from it.” Suddenly seeing those old Brahmanas thus 
lamenting distressfully, Rama speedily descended from his 
car. And along with Lakshmana and SitS, R&ma bound for 
the forest, began to walk near them on foot. Endowed with 
kindness, that friend of the good, Rama, could not by pro- 
ceeding on his car bear to part with the Br&hmanas that were 
following on foot. Seeing him thus going, the Br&hmanas 
with agitated hearts, and burning in grief, addressed R3ma 
in these words, — “The BrShmanas in a body are following 
thee ever seeking their good, and mounting on the shoulders 
of the regenerate ones, the (sacrificial) Fires are walking in 
thy wake. And behold these raised umbrellas of ours got 
from the VSjapeya sacrifice, that like unto autumnal clouds 
follow at your back. With these umbrellas got at the VSjapeya 
sacrifice, we will afford shade unto* Rama destitute of his own 
white umbrella, when he shall feel the heat of the (solar) rays. 
That intelligence of ours which ever followeth the Vedic 
Mantras, is now, O child, ready to follow thee unto the forest 



Digitized by LjOOQle 







RlMlYANA. 



in thy interests. That best of treasures, the Vedas, resides 
in our bosoms ; and our wives protected by their chastity shall 
abide in our homes. As we have already made up our miods 
to follow thee, it is useless to fix our hearts afresh. But if 
thou overlookest virtue, what becomes of abiding by righteous- 
ness ?* O thou that art ever firm in virtue, we beseech thee by 
humbling unto the dust our heads covered with hair whitehned 
like cranes, do thou desist. These numerous Brihmanas that 
have come hither have entered upon many a sacrifice. The 
completion of these, O child, depends upon thy return. All 
creatures mobile and immobile cherish thee with high regard. 
All these beseech thee. Do thou show consideration unto 
those that regard thee. Tall trees deprived of motion in con- 
sequence of being fast rooted to the earth and incapable of 
following thee, are prohibiting thee by sounding with the 
wind. And birds staying upon trees and neither manifesting 
any motion nor seeking for their food, beseech thee to have 
compassion upon all creatures. " While the Brahmanas were 
loudly demanding the return of Rama, he found the darkness 
to descend as if forbidding him. Then Sumantra unyoked the 
fatigued horses from the car, which at once fell to rolling in 
the dust. And then bathing them and making them drink, 
he soon as the dusk set in, set fare before them. 



SECTION X L V I • 



Then RSghava pausing on the banks of the TamasSL, look- 
ed at Sitft and spake unto Sumitrk’s son, saying,— u O son of 
Sumitrk, this is the first night of our exile into the forest 

• Another reading is ; What becomes of the virtu* that we expect at thy 
hand* T — T, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





A YODHYlKlNDAM. 



3i* 

From this day it behoveth thee not, good betide thee, to suffer 
thy mind to grieve (by dwelling on past joys.) The empty 
forest resounding with the cries of beasts and birds returned 
to their abodes, and covered with gloom, seems to weep 
on all sides. Doubtless to-day the men and women of Ayo- 
dhy&, the metropolis of my father, are bewailing us retired 
to the forest. O foremost of men, the people are attached 
unto thyself, the monarch, Bliarata, Satrughna, and myself, 
because of our various good qualities. 1 bewail our father 
as well as my illustrious mother. I fear lest lamenting cease- 
lessly, they become blind. But surely the virtuous Bharata 
will console our father and mother with words fraught 
with virtue, interest and profit. Reflecting again and 
again on Bharata’s sincerity of soul, I do not, O mighty- 
armed one, bewail either my mother or my father. O 
foremost of men, that thou hast followed me is what 
is thy duty. (If thou hadest not done so), I should have 
to seek elsewhere for the protection of Vaidehi. O SumitrSl's 
son, 1 will spend here this night, subsisting on water 
alone. Even this recommends itself unto me, although the 
forest yields various kinds of fruits.” Having said this unto 
Sumitr&’s son, Raghava spake unto Sumantra, saying, — “O 
mild one, do thou now heedfully tend the horses.” Then 
at sunset, fastening the horses, Sumantra fed them plentifully 
with grass, and then came back. Then seeing the night 
arrived, the charioteer worshipped the beneficent SandhyS, 
and then in company with Sumitr&’s son, prepared 
Rama's bed. And looking at that bed on the shores of the 
Tamas& surrounded by trees, Rama along with his wife and 
the son of Sutnitra, lay down. When Lakshmana found that 
Rama afflicted with fatigue had slept together with his spouse, 
he began to speak unto the charioteer concerning the various 
qualities of Rama. As remaining awake in the night, Sumitra’s 
son was engaged in expatiating to the charioteer on the 
virtues of Rama on the banks of the Tamasa, the sun arose. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




3*o 



kJaiA fan a. 



RSlma abode that night along with the subjects at some 
distance from the banks of the TamasS filled with kine. 
Rising (from his bed), that highly energetic one, Rama, view- 
ing the subjects (asleep), addressed his brother Lakshmana 
graced with auspicious marks, — “O son of Sumitr&, these that 
for our sake have disregarded their own homes, are still 
asleep beneath the trees. These citizens have determined 
upon making me turn back from the forest, — they would 
rather renounce their lives than give up their resolve. Let 
us while they are asleep ascending on our car, swiftly go our 
way without fear of molestation. Attached to me, thedenizons 
of Ikshw&ku’s city will not again indulge in sleep underneath 
trees. A prince should deliver citizens from the calamity 
they bring upon themselves ; but he should by no means 
drag them into those which he himself has brought on.” 
Then Lakshmana spake unto R5ma like unto manifest Virtue 
on earth, — “O wise one, even this is relished also by me. 
Do you speedily ascend (the car.)” R&ma said unto the 
charioteer, — “Do thou at once yoke the car. I will repair to 
the forest. Do thou, my master, swiftly go hence.” There- 
upon the charioteer bestirring himself, yoking the excellent 
horses unto the car, said unto Rama with joined hands, — 
“Here, O mightv-armed one, is your car ready yoked, O fore- 
most of car-warriors. Do you speedily ascend, good betide 
you, along with Sit& and Lakshmana.” Ascending the 
caT after equipping himself, R&ghava crossed the rapidly- 
rushing Tamasa abounding in eddies. Having crossed (the 
stream;, the auspicious and mighty-armed one came upon a 
safe and goodly high way capable of inspiring even timid 
people with confidence. But with the view of deluding the 
citizens, Rama said unto the charioteer. — “O charioteer, do 
thou ascending the car proceed northwards ; and having 
proceeded swiftly for a while, do thou turn the car. Do thou 
carefully act so that the citizens may not perceive 
this.” Hearing Riraa’s words, the charioteer did accord- 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHYlKlNDA&l. 3 * 1 

ingly, and having returned raid unto RSma to ascend the 
car. 

Then on those perpetuators of the Raghu race having 
along with SiULbeeu seated on the car,the charioteer drove the 
horses by that road which conducted to the hermitage. 
Then placing the car with its face northwards for the purpose 
of invoking auspiciousness on their journey, that mighty 
charioteer, Da^aratha’s son, established on the vehicle, set 
out for the forest. 



SECTION X L V II . 



W HEN the night had departed and day dawned, the 
citizens not finding Raghava, were overwhelmed with grief 
and were deprived of their senses. With tears of grief and 
afflicted with distress, they looked hither and thither, but 
they could not discover even the dust raised by R&ma's car. 
And those intelligent ones, extremely distressed on being 
deprived of R£ma endowed with understanding, with coun- 
tenances betokening sorrow, spoke these piteous words,— 
• f Oh ! fie on that sleep through which having been deprived 
of senses, we shall not to-day behold RSma of broad chest 
and mighty arms. How could Rima of mighty arms, resort- 
ing to this undesirable course, has gone into exile as 
an ascetic, leaving behind those that regard him dearly ? 
Why has that foremost of Raghus, who has always 
cherished us even as a father cherishes his sons begot by 
his own loins, forsaking us, betaken himself to the forest ? 
Here will we either renounce our lives, or direct our course 
to the north to meet death. Of what good are our lives, 
when we have been deprived of R£ma ? There are huge 
trunks of dry wood to be got here in plenty. Lighting the 

4i 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




J22 



Rl toll' AN A. 



pile of woods will we all enter the fire. What shall we say 
(when people ask us ?) How can we say, — ‘We took hence 
the mighty-armed, sweet-speeched and unavenging Rima' ? 
Surely seeing us without Raghava, the forlorn city with her 
women, children and grown up folks will be plunged in grief. 
We had issued with that high-souled hero. Deprived of him, 
how shall we behold that city ?” Thus raising up their arms, 
they stricken with grief, indulged in lamentations, like unto 
kine deprived of their calves. — Then following for a while the 
track of the car, they, missing the track,become overwhelmed 
with woe. And then those intelligent ones came back by the 
track of the car. “What is this ? What shall we do ? We 
have been foiled by some supernatural agency .” Then they 
returned to the city of Ayodha with its good people oppressed 
with grief, by the self-same way by which they had come. 
Viewing the city, they with their eyes weighed down with 
grief, and minds oppressed with woe, shed plentiful tears. 
“This city deprived of Rama does not look beautiful, like a 
lake bereft of its serpent by Garura, or the firmament depriv- 
ed of the Moon, or the ocean without its waters.” And they 
disturbed in mind beheld the city sunk in sorrow. And enter- 
ing their wealthy mansions, they deprived of their senses by 
grief, could not recognize them for their own, nor could they 
with their hearts rendered absolutely cheerless, although look* 
ing at them minutely, distinguish their own from others. 



SECTION X L VI If. 

— i — 

Then with depressed spirits, and exceedingly afflicted, 
with tears flooding their eyes, smitten with mortal grief, the 
inhabitants of the city went back from RSma unto the city. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A} OBHYlKlNDAM. 



3*S 

And with their lives appearing as ready to go out, those- 
unsteady ones came to their respective homes, and surrounded 
by their wives and sons, washed their faces with copious tears. 
And they forgot to rejoice or make merry, and the traders 
did not spread (their stores), and stalls did not grace 
the place, and the householders did not cook, and people did* 
not rejoice on recovering lost property or gaining a profuse- 
accession of wealth, and mothers did not feel any delight 
bn beholding their first-born. And in every home females 
afflicted with woe, weeping chid their husbands, coming 
home, with the following words as (drivers) spur elephants 
vrith hooks, “Of what use are their houses, and wives, and 
wealth, and sons, and comforts, to those who see not Raghava 
(in their midst ?) There is one only good man in this world 
even Lakshmana, who along with Sita is following Kakutstha 
Rama unto the woods. Those streams, assemblage of lotuses, 
and pools are blessed, by which bathing in the sacred waters, 
Kakutstha will pass. And romantic forests and woods, watery 
expanses of mighty volume, and mountains with flat spaces,, 
will grace Kakutstha. And forests and hills to which will 
repair Rama cannot go without paying him homage like unto 
a welcome guest. And crested with flowers of various hues 
and putting forth frequent shoots, trees, swarming with bees 
will show themselves unto Raghava. And hills from regard 
will show unto Rama arrived there the choicest flowers and 
fruits even out of season ; and will supply him with fount- 
ains of pure water. And presenting him with mgny a charming 
fountain, trees will delight Rama at the tops of mountains.* 
Where Rama is, there is not fear or failure. That mighty- 
armed son of Da9aratha is heroic. Let us while he is yet 
ahead within a short distance of us, follow Raghava. Even 
the shadow of the feet of our master, so high-souled, would, 
bring us happiness. He is the lord of all these — he is the 

* The meaning is , — Trees will please Rdghava by spreading for him a bed 
of leaves and flowers. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



324 



RlMlYANA . 



refuge — lie is the accomplishment of our religious duties. We 
and you, will serve SitI, and Rlghava.” Thus afflicted with 
grief, the women of the city spake unto their husbands. “In 
the forest Rlghava will attain for you the unattainable and 
protect what is attained ; and Sit5 being a female will do the 
same for these (women.) Who will take pleasure in residing in 
a dwelling where the heart dies within itself, which is devoid 
of delight, where the people are always agitated with anxiety 
and which is exceedingly disagreeable ? If this kingdom 
devolves on Kaikeyi it will be divested of all virtues and will 
be like unto one without a master. And of what avail then is 
our life itself, not to speak of sons and wealth. Whom else will 
that stainer of her line, Kaikeyi, forsake now, who for the sake 
of wealth has forsaken her son and her lord ? We swear by 
our sons that so long as Kaikeyi is alive, we living will never 
stay in her kingdom, although we may be maintained by her. 
What happiness can be ours by living with that wicked and 
unrighteous one who lost to every sense of shame is bent 
upon exiling the son of the foremost of kings? Troubled by 
disturbances, with all its sacrifices stopped, and having no 
master over it, the entire (kingdom) will meet with destruction 
because of Kaikeyi. On RSma retiring to the forest, the 
lord of earth will surely not live ; and Da 9 aratha dying, it is 
evident everything will come to naught. Do you, your virtue 
exhausted,, and oppressed with grief pounding poison, take it, 
or follow Righava, or remove to such a place that the very 
name of Kaikeyi may not reach your ears t RSlma has been 
deceitfully exiled along with his wife and Lakshmana ; and we 
are bound unto Bharata like unto a (sacrificial,) beast before 
one that is to slaughter it. Surely that mighty car-warrior, with 
deepest collar-bones having a countenance resembling the full- 
moon, sable-hued, repressing his foes, with his arms reaching 
unto his knees and lotus-like eyes — R&ma the elder brother 
of Lakshmana — always speaking first (to a visitor,) suave, 
truth-telling, endowed with prowess, amiable unto all men, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A yodhfAkXndam. 



325 



and lovely like the moon himself, surely that foremost of men 
gifted with the strength of a mad elephant, will grace the 
forests, ranging it around.” Thus lamenting in the city, the 
Females thereof burning in grief became distressed like people 
stricken with panic on the occasion of a plague. 

As the women were thus bewailing R&gliava in their* 
homes, the Sun set and night came on. And the city became 
enveloped in darkness, and the light (of the sacrificial fires) 
was extinguished, and the sounds of study and edifying dis- 
course ceased. And the shops of the tradesmen being closed, 
and festive mirth having disappeared, and people becoming 
defenceless, the city of AyodhyS resembled the firmament 
deprived of the stars. And distressed for the sake of Rama 
as if it was a son or a brother of theirs that was banished, the 
women weeping forlorn, lamented with senses . lost ; and 
Rama was to them more than a son. And the voice of song 
and festal glee and dance and sounds of instruments having 
died away, and mirth having disappeared, and the shops not 
displaying their wares, AyodhyS then resembled the mighty 
ocean emptied of its waters. 



SECTION X Li x . 



: 00 :- 



That best of men, Rama, remembering his father's com- 
mand cleared a large tract of country before the night 
terminated. And as he went on, the auspicious night was 
spent. And then having offered up his devotions unto 
the beneficent Sandhya, Rama entered into another 
country. And seeing villages having ploughed fields on 
their skirts, and flowering woods, he by means of those 
excellent horses, proceeded very fast although seeming to go 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




326 



rAmA fan a. 



slowly. And as Rama proceeded,* he heard the villagers 
speaking to each other, saying, — “Fie on king Da£aratha t 
who has yielded himself up unto lust ! Ah \ the rebutless. 
fell and sinful Kaikeyi intent upon impiety, having put by her 
honor, has resolved upon an exceedingly atrocious deed — she 
that exiles into the woods such a virtuous son of the 
monarch, endowed with high wisdom, kind, and having his 
senses under control.f Alas ! king Da£aratha has no affection 
for his own son, since he wishes to dismiss from hence RSroa 
sinless and dear unto the subjects.” Hearing these words 
of the villagers, that hero, the lord of Ko^ala, left Ko^ala 
behind him. Then crossing the river Veda^ruti of sacred 
waters, R5ma went in the direction of the quarter in which 
Agastya resided. (South) 

Then proceeding for a good while, he crossed the 
coolflowing stream Gomati running in the direction of the 
ocean, with its banks filled with kine and inundating 
its edge. Having passed the Gomati, RSghava by means 
of fleet-coursing horses next crossed over the river 
Sandika resounding with the cries of cranes and pea- 
cocks. Here R&ma showed unto Vaidehi those flourish- 
ing regions that had formerly been conferred by king Manu 
on IkshwSku, and which teemed with populous tracts. Then 
frequently addressing the charioteer, saying, “O Suta”, that 
best of men furnished with grace and endowed with a voice 
like that of a mad swan, spoke, — “When shall I coming back, 
range ahunting the blossoming groves of the Sarayu, along 
with my father and mother ? I do not so much long for 
hunting in the woods of the Sarayu ; but a relish (for the 
pastime) is considered as beyond compare being held 
in esteem by the RSjarshis. Hunting in the forest was in- 

* The N. W. P. text has an additional couplet : — How will that exalted 
lady , Janaka's daughter, ever engaged in enjoyment, bear misery ? — T. 

f The N. W. P. text has an additional line : — And of the reprehensible Kai- 
keyi intent upon cruel deeds. — 7*. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





AYODHYlKXNDAM . 



327 



troduced for the recreation of RSghavas. Yet do I not take 
beyond measure to the chase which has been followed 
in season by the descendants of Manu and which is ever 
coveted by bowmen. Taking this subject, the descendant of 
Ikshwaku passed the way, addressing sweet words unto the 
charioteer. 



SECTION L. 

H aving passed the extensive and romantic Ko9ala, the 
intelligent elder brother of Lakshmana facing AyodhyS said 
with joined hands, — “O best of cities, governed by K^kutstha, 
I address thee as well as the deities that inhabit and guard 
thee. Returning from my abode in the woods, I will, freed 
from my debt unto the lord of earth, behold thee again along 
with my father and mother.” Then he furnished with grace- 
ful coppery eyes raising his right hand, with tears in his 
eyes and in forlorn guise addressed the people of the 
provinces, saying, — “Ye have shown due compassion and 
regret for me. To grieve long is not fit. Do ye therefore 
repair to look after your interests.” Thereupon, saluting 
that high-souled one and going round him, bewailing all the 
while in heaviness of heart, they at times stopped on their 
way. And as they kept lamenting, unsatiated in beholding 
him, R2ghava went beyond the range of their sight, like the 
Sun disappearing at night-fall. Then that powerful one 
mounted on his car left behind him Ko9ala abounding in 
wealth and kine, inhabited by charitable people, auspicious, 
free from every kind of fear, charming, containing altars and 
stakes, with gardens and mango groves, furnished with 
tanks teeming with burly and contented people, filled with 
kinc, worthy of being protected by monarchs and resounding 
with the sounds of Vedic recitations. Proceeding at a 



Digitized by Google 




3^8 



RlAtli’ANA. 



middling pace, that best of those endowed with fortitude 
passed through lands smiling cheerfully, prosperous 

and crowded with elegant villas, — realms worthy d 

being coveted by the foremost of kings. Then R§,gha^ 
saw the celestial Ganga running in three courses win 
cool waters free from moss, beautiful to behold* frequentd 
by the sages, adorned with graceful asylums dose 
by, containing sacred watery expanses haunted at the 
hours of sport by delighted Apsaras, graced with celestials, 
DSnavas, Gandharbas and Kinnaras, ever holy, attended bj 
the wives of N£gas and Gandharbas, with hills serving as 
sporting-places for the celestials — the river surrounded bj 
gardens of the immortals — that for the behoof of the celestbh 
had ascended heaven, famous, furnished with assemblage 
of celestial lotuses, with the rocks laughing aloud in conse- 
quence of the dashing of water, laughing without blembb 
with foam, sometimes having her water flowing like a braid 
and sometimes decked by eddies, sometimes still and deep 
and sometimes rushing furiously, sometimes sounding solemn- 
ly and sometimes roaring dreadfully, with crowds of deities 
bathing in its water, embellished with fresh-blown lotuses 
having spacious shoals and spots covered with glittering sand 
resounding with the cries of cranes of various kinds, graced 
by Chakravdkas , ever resorted to by maddened fowls, without 
blame, decked by trees on its banks resembling garlands 
somewhere covered with full-blown lotuses and somewhere 
containing multitudes of lotuses, at places decked with tracts 
of lilies, at others with opening buds, rife with the farina 
of various flowers, sometimes resembling a proud female 
removing the dirt of sin, translucent like a gem to the view, 
with the elephants of the quarters, w r ild ones, mad ones, as 
well as those the best of their species, and those carrying 
the foremost of celestials, roaring in the neighbouring woods, 
adorned carefully with the choicest ornaments like unto a 
damsel, crowded with flowers and fruits and bushes as 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHYkRkNDAM . 



3*9 



also with birds, flowing from the feet of Vishnu, divine, 
without sin, capable of destroying it, filled with porpoises, 
crocodiles and snakes, drawn out from the matted locks 
of Sankara by the energy of Sagara’s descendant — the 
queen of the Ocean — resonant with the cries of cranes and 
kraunchas . The mighty-armed RAma came to the GangA 
near Sringaverapura. And beholding (the river) with her 
surging eddies, that mighty car-warrior said unto the chariot- 
eer, Sumantra, “We will rest here to day. There is hard 
by the river a gigantic Ingudi tree, bearing a profusion of 
flowers and fresh leaves. Here, O charioteer, will we stay 
to-day. I see (before me) the foremost of streams, whose 
waters are honored iby all) and which is sacred to celestials 
and men and Gandharbas and beasts and serpents and fowls. 
Thereupon saying unto RAghava, “Very well/* Lakshmana 
and Sumantra with the horses went to the Ingudi tree. And 
reaching the tree, that desendant of IkshwAku alighted from 
the car along with his wife and Lakshmaua. Then descend- 
ing, Sumantra relieved those excellent horses, and with 
joined hands stood before RAma seated at the foot of the tree. 
There lived at the place a king named Guha, a friend unto 
RAma, dear as his own self, a Nish Ada by birth, powerful 
and famed as the lord of the NishAdas. Hearing that that 
foremost of men, RAma, had arrived at the place, he (Guha) 
surrounded by his aged counsellors and kindred came unto 
him. Seeing the lord of the NishAdhas at a distance, RAma 
came up unto him in company with SumitrA's son. Thereat 
touched, Guha embracing RAghava said unto him, “O RAma, 
as AyodhyA this kingdom is unto thee. What shall I do for 
thee ? Who, O might-armed one, receives such a welcome 
guest ?” Then speedily bringing various kinds of sapid rice 
and Arghyas, he said, — “O mighty-armed one, has thy journey 
been a pleasant one ? This entire earth is thine. We 
are thy servants ; thou art our master. Do thou rule here, 
accepting the eatables and drinkables and those that are to 

4 * 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




35© 



RlMlrANA. 



be sucked and excellent beds and fodder.” When Guha bad 
said this, RSghava answered him, saying, — u We have been 
well received by thee and are well pleased with thee, since 
corning here on foot thou hast shown us affection/' Then 
pressing Guha hard with his arms, Rama said, “0 Guha, k 
is by good luck that I see thee whole along with thy friends. 
Is thy kingdom in peace both as regards thy friends and the 
forest ? The things that thou hast presented me with out of 
love I accept but cannot enjoy. Do thou know me as assum- 
ing an ascetic mode of life in the woods, in which 1 am to 
were Ku$a and bark and live upon fruits and roots. So, with 
the single exception of the food for the horses, things require 
I none ; and these horses being well kept, 1 shall consider 
myself as entertained by thee. These are the favorites of my 
father, Da9ar&tha, and on these horses being well provided 
for, I shall be well received. Thereupon Guha on the spot 
commanded the men, saying, “Let the horses have without 
delay meats and drinks.” Then putting his sheet over hb 
person, he (R&raa) performed his evening devotions. Having 
done this, he took as his sustenance the water that had been 
procured by Lakshmana himself. On R<ima having lain down 
on the ground along with his wife, Lakshmana washed their 
feet, and then remained stationed under the tree. Then bow 
in hand and with his wits about him, conversing with 
SumitrU's son along with the charioteer,Guha remained awake, 
watching Rama. Thus the livelong night passed away with 
that illustrious, intelligent and high-souled son of Da9arllha, 
unacquainted with troubles and worthy of happiness. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A yODUri/CANDAM. 



SECTION LI. 



33 * 



.A. S for the purpose of protecting his brother, Lakshmana 
was watching him out of sincere affection, Guha burning 
in grief addressed that descendant of Raghu, saying — “This 
O child, is the easeful bed that hath been prepared for 
thee. 0 prince, do thou as thou listest, lie down upon it. 
These (foresters) are inured to this hardship ; but thou art 
worthy of ease. We will wake up during the night for guar- 
ding Kakutstha. There is none on earth dearer unto me than 
R&ma. This I tell thee truly and I swear by truth itself. 
Through his grace I hope in this world to attain high fame, 
and great religious merit as well as completely secure profit 
and pleasure. I will bow in hand in company with my kin- 
dred adequately guard my dear friend reposing with Sit§; 
Always ranging in this forest, nothing herein is unknown to 
me. I shall vanquish even any mighty body of fourfold forces 
(that may come up against us.)’ 1 Thereupon Lakshmana said, — 
“O sinless one, protected by thee ever having thy sight fixed 
on virtue, we do not fear to live in this place. But how with 
Da^aratha's son lying down on the ground along with Slth 
can I indulge in sleep or what is the use of my living and 
enjoying happiness ? Him do thou behold with ease asleep on 
the grass in company with SitSL, who was incapable of being 
borne in fight by the gods and the Asuras. Him do thou 
behold, w T ho was obtained by Da 9 aratha as his son through 
various kinds of prowess, mantras and asceticism, and who 
is crowned with virtues beseeming such austerities, etc. 
RSima being banished, the king will not live long} and 
the earth will shortly be widowed .” Having bewailed 
aloud, the women have, methinks, (by this time) ceased 
through fatigue, and the king's residence is still. I can- 
not hope that Kau^alyS, the king, and my mother are yet 
alive. If they are, it is for this night only. Even if my 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




33 * 



KlMl VAN A. 



mother live looking up to Satrughna, yet this is my grief 
that that mother of a hero, I<au9a1y& will breathe her last. 
And that palace filled with people attached unto Rlma 
and flooded with the light of delight, will, visited with 
the calamity that will befall the king meet with destruction. 
How will the life of that high-souled king not seeing 
his magnanimous son, his eldest son, remain in his body ? 
And the king dying, Kau9alya will die after him and then, my 
mother will depart this life. Frustrated in his desire, my 
father, foiled in his endeavours to confer the kingdom on 
Rlma, will, exclaiming ‘All is lost/ ‘All is lost/ give up the 
ghost. Surely they are blessed that when the time shall come 
when the king will die, will perform the funeral rites of that 
descendant of Raghu. They will happily range the*capital 
of my father, furnished with fairlooking terraces, with its 
high ways laid out orderly, having lordly edifices and palatial 
residences, graced with excellent courtezans, abounding with 
cars, elephants and horses, resounding with the notes of 
trumpets — the abode of all auspiciousness — filled with portly 
and contented folks, rich in gardens and villas, and celebra- 
ting popular festivities. If Da 9 aratha live we shall returning 
from the forest, behold that high-souled one observing noble 
vows. If we remain in peace, we shall returning from the 
forest with that one firm in promise, enter Ayodhya.” As 
the high-souled son of the king oppressed with grief was thus 
lamenting sitting up, the day broke. When that son of the 
foremost of men, intent on the welfare of the subjects had 
spoken thus truly, Guha, out of extreme affection for (R 3 ma), 
shed tears afflicted with grief and hurt like an elephant 
suffering from fever. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



AYODHrlKlKDAM 



S3 J 



SECTION LI I . 



HEN the morning broke, that illustrious one having a 
ipacious chest, R§ma, addressed SumitrS’s son, Lakshmana, 
graced with auspicious marks, — “This is the time of sunrise : 
the reverend Night hath departed. O child, this gracefully 
sable-hued bird, the coel, has begun to warble, and I hear the 
cries of peacocks uttering notes in the woods. O amiable 
one, we will cross the Jahnavi, fast rushing to the ocean." 
Hearing Rama's words, that enhancer of the delight of 
friends, Sumitra’s son, conveyed them unto Guha and the 
charioteer; and then stood before his brother. Hearing of 
Rama’s speach and accepting it, that lord of the Nishadas 
speedily summoning his counsellors spike unto them saying, 
— “Do ye without delay bring to this bathing-place a strong 
and elegent boat furnished with a rudder and steered by a 
helmsman, such as is capable of ferrying (people) comfort- 
ably." Hearing this mandate of Guha. his potent counsellors 
procuring a goodly boat, informed him of it. Then with 
joined hands, Guha spake unto Raghava, saying, — “The boat 
is ready, worshipful one. What more shall I do in thy behalf? 
O thou that resemblest the son of a celestial, here is 
the boat for thee, O foremost of men, to cross over the 
river that goeth after the ocean. O thou of excellent vows, 
do thou ascend it." Thereupon the highly energetic 
Rama said unto Guha the following words, — “I have attained 
my end through thee. Do thou at once get on board the 
b a gg a g e ” Then donning on their mail and equipped with 
their bows, quivers and swords, the Rlghavas along with 
Sita descended unto the Ganga. Then coming forward in 
humble guise before Rama cognizant of virtue, the charioteer 
said with joined hands, — “What shall I do (now) ?" There- 
upon Da9aratha’s son touching Sumantra by his goodly 
right hand, said,— “O Sumantra, do thou aga ; n repair unto 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




334 



RAMAl'ANA. 



the monarch, but let thy senses be unclouded/ 1 “Do thou*' 
said he unto the charioteer, “turn back. So far I have come 
(in obedience to the order of the monarch;. Now, renounc- 
ing the car, will I repair unto the mighty forest on foot/’ 
Finding himself thus commanded, the charioteer, Sumantra 
grieved at heart spoke unto that best of men, the descendant 
of Ikshw&ku. “That Destiny owing to which you will have 
to pass your days in the forest like a low person, along with 
your brother and wife, has in this world been withstood by 
none. I deem the Brahmacharyya mode of life, or study, or 
meekness or sincerity as attended with no fruit, since you 
have come by calamity. O Raghava, living in the forest 
with Vaidehi and your brother, you, O Lord, attain a state 
(of supreme excellence), having, as it were, conquered the 
three worlds. O R&ma, it is we, wretched that we are, 
that are undone, as we, deprived of your company, 
shall come under the sinful Kaikeyi expressing great 
misery.” Haying said this, the charioteer, Sumantra, 
seeing R3ma intent upon going to a distant land, wept 
for a long while in heaviness of heart. Then when be 
had dried up his tears, and sanctified himself by touching 
the water of the Gang!, R&ma again addressed the charioteer 
in sweet words, saying, — “I do not find any one that is a 
friend of the sons of IkshwSku like unto thee. Do thou so 
act that king Da^aratha may not grieve (for me). The lord of 
earth hath been deprived of his senses by grief, hath grown 
old, and is oppressed by the weight of desires (thwarted). 
Therefore it is that I tell thee this. Whatever that noble- 
minded lord of earth commands for the pleasure of 
Kaikeyi, should by us be done with alacrity. It is for 
this that those lords of men, kings, govern, — viz., that others 
may not thwart their purposes. O Sumantra, do thou act so, 
that the mighty monarch may not come across any thing un- 
pleasant, or be attacked with chagrin through grief. Do thou 
saluting him for me say these words unto the aged monarch, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODUYlKXNDAM. 



335 



who has his senses under complete control, and who hath 
never seen misfortune before. ‘Neither I nor Lakshmana 
grieve for being ejected out of AyodhyS, or that we shall have 
to abide in the forest. After these fourteen years have gone 
by, you will set Lakshmana, Site! and myself come to you 
speedily/ Having thus, O Sumantra, in my name agaiu and 
again spoken to the king, to my mother and to Kaikeyi along 
with the other revered ladies do thou communicate unto 
Kau^alya our welfare conveying unto her at the same time 
Sita’s and Lakshmana's salutations to her feet as well those of 
myself who am her eldest son. Do thou also tell the king, — 
‘Do you spedily bring Bharata ; and when Bharata has come, 
let him be invested with royalty. And when you have 
embraced Bharata and installed him in the kingdom, you 
no longer be overpowered with grief on our account/ And tell 
Bharata, — ‘As thou bearest thyself unto the king, so it behoves 
thee to bear thyself to all thy mothers, without making any 
distinction at all. As Kaikeyi is unto thee, so without 
distinction is Suraitra, and so also without distinction my 
mother Kau£aly&. Governing the kingdom as the heir- 
apparent with the view of compassing the pleasure of our 
father, he will be able to secure happiness both in this world 
and the next/ 1 Told by Rama to go back and instructed 
in this wise, Sumantra having heard everything, addressed 
Klkutstha from affection, saying, — “It behoves you to forgive 
what 1 say plainly from affection, without letting myself 
be overwhelmed with emotion, and with due reverence 
for you. How can I, O child, without you return to 
that city, which seems as if afflicted with the grief incident 
to the loss of a son ? Having then seen my car with R2ma on 
it, the hearts of the people and the palace now will in all likeli- 
hood burst when they shall see it without R&ma. Surely the 
city wil be distressed on beholding this empty car, like 
a host seeing a car with its hero slain and the charioteer 
alone left in the field. Thinking in their minds that 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




33 * 



rXaiXtana. 



you although actually at a great distance from them, 
are before them, the subjects (not finding you) will 
renounce food (and thus destroy themselves.) You 

yourself witnessed how the subjects overwhelmed with 
grief on your account, conducted themselves when 
you were being banished unto the woods. They will on 
seeing me with the car, burst out into lamentatiuus 
exceeding a hundred times in bitterness those in which they 
indulged when you set out for the forest. Shall I say unto 
the worshipful one, — ‘I have conveyed your son to the home 
of his maternal uncle. Do you not grieve 1 . I will never tell 
such a lie. Yet how can I speak this truth which is so 
very unpleasant ? And ever abiding by my command and 
used to carry your friends, how can these excellent horses 
bear this cal' without you ? Therefore, O sinless one, I 
shall not be able to go to AyodhyS without you ; and it 
behoves you to permit me to follow you to the forest. But 
if you forsake me who beseech you, I will as soou as left 
by you, enter into fire along with the car. I shall, 0 
R&ghava, by means of this car, withstand all those impedi- 
ments that shall present themselves against your ascetic 
austerities in the forest. I have through- your favour 
experienced the pleasure of driving the car. I expect 
at your hands the pleasure of living in the woods. Be you 
propitious. It is my wish to remain in the forest with you, 
and do you say, affectionately — ‘Do you remain by my side* 
And these horses, O hero, will attain to a supreme state if 
they serve you during your abode in the forest. Living in the 
forest, I will serve you with the crown of my head ; and I 
will entirely renounce AyodhyJl or the celestial regions 
themselves. Even as a doer of evil deeds cannot euter 
the metropolis of the mighty Indra, I am incapable of enter- 
ing Ayodh>& without you. And this is my desire that the 
term of exile over, I may carry you back to the palace on 
this very car. Remaining with you in the forest the fourteen 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYAKANDAM , 



337 



years will pass away dwindled into a moment, but without 
you, they shall assume the proportions of an hundred years. 

0 you bearing affection towards your servants, it does not 
behove you to forsake your servant having regard for you, 
ever abiding by the way that is wended by the son of his 
master, and observing the duties of his position.’ 1 There- 
upon Rima kind towards servants, said these words unto 
Sumantra as he besought him thus humbly in various ways, 
“O thou that bearest attachment unto thy master, I know 
that thou regardest me highly. But do thou listen as to why 

1 send thee to the city from hence. Seeing thee returned to 
the city, my youngest mother Kaikeyi will believe that Rama 
has gone to the woods. Then well pleased on my having 
repaired to the woods, she will not entertain any apprehen- 
sion anent the righteous monarch, thinking that he is 
untruthful. This is my first wish that my youngest mother 
may obtain her son’s kingdom, properous and well protected 
by Bharata. Do thou, O Sumantra, bear thyself unto the 
palace to compass the end of both the king and myself, and 
do thou communicate in the desired way what I have said 
unto the respective parties.” Having said this unto the 
charioteer and consoled him again and again, the energetic 
R&ma spoke unto Guha the following words fraught with 
reason, ”0 Guha, I should not now reside in a forest in- 
habited by men. I should certainly now abide in an asylum 
in proper guise. In harmony with the wishes of Site and 
Lakshmana, I, imposing on myself in the interests of my father 
selfdenial and wearing that ornament of ascetics, a head of 
matted hair, will go (to the forest). Do thou therefore bring 
me starch from the banian.” Thereupon Guha speedily 
brought the starch for the prince ; and prepared matted 
locks for himself, R5ma and Lakshmana. And that mighty- 
armed chief of men wore matted locks. And those brothers 
R&ma and Lakshmana dressed as mendicants, and wearing 
heads of matted hair, appeared like saints. Then entering upon 

43 

Digitized by Google 




333 



RAM AY AN A. 



the V&naprastha mode of life, Rama along with Lakshmana 
assuming the vow of that life, observed unto that adherent 
of his, Guha, — “Do thou, my friend, vigilantly protect the 
army, the exchequer, the fort and the provinces ; for a king- 
dom demands all the exertions (of the king thereof).” Then 
taking the permission of Guha, the descendant of IkshwSku, 
holding his soul in calmness, set out with his wife and Laksh- 
mana. Seeing a boat at the river-side, that son of Ikshwaku 
desirous of crossing the swift-coursing Ganga, spoke these 
words, — “Do thou ascend, gently, O foremost of men, the boat 
that stayeth here, after the making the virtuous Sita ascend 
by taking her by the hand.” Hearing his brothers command, 
that strong-willed one, furthering everything, having made 
Mithiia’s daughter ascend, ascended himself. That energetic 
elder brother of Lakshmana next ascended himself. Then the 
lord of the Nishadas, Guha, incited his kinsfolk. Having 
got on board the boat, the exceedingly puissant Raghava for 
securing his welfare, recited mantras fit to be recited by 
Kshatriyas and Br&hmanas. Then that mighty car- warrior, 
Lakshmana, sipping water from the river as laid down 
in the scriptures, bowed down to it along with Sit* in 
gladness of heart. Then telling Sumantra, Guha, and the 
forces, RSma ascending the boat, ordered the boatmen 
(to proceed). Then the boat decked out by the helms* 
man, moved by them, and urged on by the pulls of the 
goodly oars, proceeded apace in the water. Having 
arrived at the middle of the Bhagirathi, that blameless one, 
Vaidehi, with joined hands, addressed the river, saying,— 
“O Ganga, protected by thee, may the son of the intelligent 
and mighty monarch, Da 9 aratha, execute the mandate 
(of the latter.) Having spent complete fourteen years 
in the forest, he will return in company with his brother and 
myself. Then, O worshipful one, O thou of auspicious 
fortune, having returned safely, I will, O Ganga, worship thee, 
thou that crownst every desire. 0 thou that wendst in three 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KA NDAM. 



339 



ways, O revered one, thou envelopest the regions of BrahmS. 
Thou appearest in this world as the spouse of the Ocean- 
king. I will, O respected one, bow down unto thee, O 
beauteous one, I will hymn thee, when, with good fortune 
returned, the foremost of men has obtained the kingdom, 
I will to please thee give away unto Brihmanas hundreds and 
thousands of kine, cloths, sapid rice, and vessels of wine by 
thousands, and pillaos. O worshipful one, I will worship 
thee on Rama having returned to the city. And I will 
worship all the gods that dwell on thy banks, as well as the 
holy spots and fanes, as soon as, O sinless one, that 
mighty-armed one without sin will, coming back from his 
abode in the forest, enter AyodhySl in company with 
his brother and myself.” Having thus addressed the 
GangS, that blameless one ever obedient unto her hus- 
band, swiftly went to the south bank (of the river). Going 
to the (other) bank of the stream, that best of men, and 
subduer of foes stood along with his brother and Vaidehi. Then 
that long-armed one spoke unto the enhancer ofSumitrS's 
delight, saying, — *‘Be thou, whether in society or solitude, 
intent upon protecting SitS. Of course it behoves us to protect 
her in lone places. Do thou, O son of SumitrS, go ahead ; and 
let SitS follow thee. I myself will go in your wake, protect- 
ing both yourself and SitS. Surely, O foremost of men, 
we should now protect each other. We have not yet 
performed any of the arduons tasks. To day Vaidehi will 
know the grief of a life in the woods. And to day she will 
enter the forest destitute of the concourse of men, devoid of 
fields and gardens, uneven, and containing pits, etc.” 
Hearing R&ma’s words, Lakshmana went ahead ; that descend- 
ant of Raghu, Rima, followed SitS. 

On R&ma having speedily crossed the Gang!, the 
distressed Sumantra who had been gazing at him stedfastly, 
being no longer able to discern him, turned away his ayes 
and, overcome with grief, shed tears. And having crossed 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




340 



RAMA FAN A. 



that mighty river, that high-souled one, that bestower of 
boons, resembling in prowess a Lokap&la, without delay 
entered the flourishing and smiling Vatsas crowned with 
goodly crops. And then the two (brothers) having slain the 
four kinds of beasts, viz., boars, risyas , fir is katas and maha - 
rurusy * and taking their flesh, in the eveuing took refuge 
under a mighty tree, feeling the demands of appetite. 



SCTION LIM. 



Having taken refuge under the tree and performed his 
evening devotions, that foremost of those capable of charm- 
ing others, Rlma, addressed Lakshmana, saying, — “To day 
is the first night (which we must spend) outside the 
inhabited tracts without the company of Sumantra. Thou 
ought not to suffer thy mind to be uneasy on that score. 
From to night forth, we shall have to guard her vigilantly ; 
for, O Lakshmana, the preservation of what she has as well 
as the securing unto her of what she has not, rests with us. 
We will, O son of SumitrS, anyhow pass the night ; let us 
ourselves procuring (leaves) and spreading them on the 
ground, anyhow lie down on it.” Saying this, Rlma 
lying down on the ground although worthy of a costly 
bed, spoke these excellent words unto Sumitr^s son, — “O 
Lakshmana, surely the king sleeps uneasily to day, and Kaikeyi 
having attained her end ought to be satisfied. Will not 
that revered lady, for the purpose of having Bharata estab- 
lished in the kingdom, take the king’s life, when she shall 
see Bharata arrived ? Forlorn and old and deprived of me, 
1 do not know what he wiH do, his soul possessed by desire, 
and having come under the influence of Kaikeyi. Viewing 
this calamity (that has overtaken us) and the disorder that has 

• Varieties of deer. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 





A VODHVA KA NDA M. 



34i 



taken place in the senses of the monarch, I deem even lust 
as more potent than either virtue or interest. O Lakshmana, 
what man is there ignorant though he be, who for the sake of a 
female forsaketh as my father has done me, his son follow- 
ing his foot-steps ? Ah ! Kaikeyi's son Bharata with his wife 
is really happy — he that enjoys the sole sovereignity of the 
delighted Ko^alas. Now that our father has grown old and 
I have taken refuge in the forest, he will alone experience 
the supreme felicity in the kingdom. He that renouncing in- 
terest and virtue, followes lust, speedily gets himself involved 
in troubles even like king Do9aratha. O amiable one, I think 
that Kaikeyi has been born for making an end of Da9aratha, 
sending me into exile, and conferring the kingdom on Bharata. 
At present for imparting me pain, Kaikeyi intoxicated by the 
tide of good fortune, will afflict Kau^alySL and SumitrSL Thy 
mother, the revered SumitrS, will be smitten with grief on 
our account. Do thou, Lakshmana, tomorrow morning repair 
unto Ayodhya : I alone will go unto Dandaka along with 
Sita. Thou wilt be the protector of the helpless Kau^alyS. 
Kaikeyi is surely mean-minded, she perpetrates wrongs 
from malice. O thou cognizant of virtue, she may 
administer poison unto my mother. Surely, O child, in a 
former birth, women were bereft of their sons by my mother, 
O son of Sumitra ; and it is for this that this misfortune has 
befallen her. Having been brought up and reared with 
great pains by Kau9alya, I have left her at the time when her 
labors ought to have borne fruit. Fie on me ! Let no woman, 

0 son of Sumitra, give birth unto a son like me who have 
imparted such infinite pain unto my mother. O Lakshmana, 

1 consider my mother’s female parrot as more sharing her 
affection, since she is heard to say, *0 Suka, do you bite the 
foot of the foe ? What am I, O repressor of foes, now to do for 
her, bewailing, of slender fortune, — she that hath not profitted 
in the least by her son, and who stands in no further need of 
his good offices ? Surely my unfortunate mother, Kau9alya, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




342 



RAM A FAN A . 



bereft of me, lies down on the ground, overwhelmed with 
woe, and plunged in an ocean of grief. O Lakshmana, 
enraged, I alone, without doubt, can rid AyodhyS — the Earth 
herself — by means of my arrows. But improper is the display 
of prowess for no reason. O sinless one, I am afraid of 
unrighteousness and of the next life ; and for this it is that, 
O Lakshmana, I do not install myself in the kingdom.” 

Having in solitude for a long while piteously bewailed 
thus *and in other ways, Rama sat silent in the night with 
tears in his eyes. Thereupon Lakshmana consoled RSma 
spent with lamentation, like unto fire deprived of its radience 
or the ocean of its tide. “Surely, O R§ma, O foremost of 
warriors, on your having come out, the city of Ayodhyi is 
shorn of its splendour like the night deprived of the moon 
This is not fit that you should grieve ; for thereby, O fore- 
most of men, you make both Sita and myself grieve. O 
Righava, deprived of you neither Sita nor I can live for a 
moment, like fish taken out of water : without you, O re- 
pressor of foes, I wish to see neither my father, nor 
Satrughna, nor Sumitra, nor heaven itself.” Then viewing 
from where they sat at ease their well-laid bed under the 
banian, those virtuous ones (Rama and Sita) went to it. 
Hearing Lakshmana’s excellent and appropriate words with 
which he gladly assumed a life in the woods, that subduer of 
foes, Raghava, in the name of righteousness, at once fully 
granted him the permission to dwell with him for the entire 
fourteen years. Then like unto a couple of lions dwelling 
on a mountain-summit, at that lone spot of the extensive 
forest, those powerful perpetuators of the Raghu race, began 
to dwell without fear. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KA NDA M. 



343 



SECTION LIV. 



Having passed the auspicious night underneath that 
mighty tree, they, when the sun had risen in unclouded 
splendour, went away from that place. Then diving into 
a, mighty forest, they proceeded in the direction in which the 
BhSgirathi Gang!, meets with the Yamuna. And those 
illustrious ones went on, viewing at intervals various fields 
and delightful lands which they had never seen before. And 
going on beholding various kinds of blossoming trees, R5ma 
when the day had declined, spoke unto Sumitra's son, saying, 
“O son of Sumitra, do thou behold the beautiful wreath of 
smoke that rises in front of PraySga — sign of the worshipful 
Fire, and I infer some ascetic to be near. For certain we 
have arrived at the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna ; 
and it is for this that we hear the roar of the waters produced 
by the rushing of them. And all these various trees with 
their wood hewn away by foresters are seen in the asylums. ,, 
Thus having proceeded at ease, those bowmen when the 
sun stood aslant, arrived in the vicinity of the ascetic's 
residence on the delta of the Yamuna and the Ganga. And 
proceeding awhile on the way, Rama, in presence of the 
asylum, came up to Bharadwaja’s place, frightening beasts 
and birds. And arriving at the hermitage, the heroes desirous 
of seeing the ascetic, stood at a distance with Sita behind 
them. And as soon as entering in, that exalted one saw 
that high-souled anchoret of accomplished vows, who 
had attained spiritual insight through austerities, sitting 
surrounded by his disciples after having finished the 
Agnihotra, Rama with joined hands saluted him along 
with Sumitra's son and Sita. Then Lakshmana's elder 
brother imparted unto Bharadwaja a knowledge of himself. 
“O worshipful one, we are the sons of Da^aratha, Rama 
and Lakshmana. This is my wife, the auspicious daughter 



Digitized by 



Google 




344 



RAM A Y ANA. 



of Janaka. This blameless one followeth me unto the solitary 
forest ; and my dear younger brother, the son of Sumitra 
too, observing the vow, follows me, who have been exiled 
by my father. O revered one, commissioned by my father 
I will enter the forest of asceticism, and there subsisting on 
fruits and roots will practise virtue.” Hearing those words of 
the intelligent prince, that righteous (ascetic) brought a bull* 
as well as arghya and water and divers kinds of edibles 
consisting of wild fruits and roots. And that one of fiery 
austerities assigned quarters, along with beasts and birds as 
well as ascetics, for Rlma. Then paying homage unto R2ma 
as he proceeded by short stages, and asking him, — “Has your 
journey been a pleasant one ?” — the ascetic sat down. And 
when Rlghava had sat down after receiving the homage, 
BharadwSija spoke unto him these words fraught with virtue, — 
“O KSkutstha, 1 behold thee come after a long time. I have 
heard of thy causeless exile. This spot at the meeting of the 
mighty rivers is lonely, sacred and charming. Do thou dwell 
here happily.” Thus addressed by Bharadw&ja, that descendant 
of Raghu, Rlma intent on the welfare of all, answered in aus- 
picious words, — “O reverend one, I apprehend that, living hard 
by, the inhabitants of the city and the provinces, thinking 
me as easily to be seen, will come to this asylum desirous 
of beholding me and Vaidehi. It is for this reason that living 
at this place does not recommend itself unto me. Do thou, 
O worshipful one, hit upon a retired and agreeable asylum 
where Janaka’s daughter worthy of happiness, will pass her 
days pleasantly.” Hearing this auspicious speech of R&ghava, 
that eminent anchoret Bharadw£ja said these words calcu- 
lated to serve R&ma’s purpose, — “Ten Krosas hence, my child, 
is the mountain where thou shalt dwell. It is inhabited by 
ntaharshis , and is sacred, and picturseque throughout, abound- 
ing in Gol&ngulas , monkeys, and bears, — known by the name 

• When an eminent guest came to a person's house, he offered madhupark *, 
with a bull which was killed for his entertainment. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KA NDA M. 



345 



of Chitrakuta — resembling Gandhamidana. On beholding 
the peaks of Chitrakuta, one reaps welfare, and ignorance 
does not envelope one’s mind. There innumerable saints with 
the hair of their heads rendered white like skulls, having spent 
hundreds of years, have through austerities ascended heaven. 
That solitary spot I deem as one which will make a happy 
residence for thee. 0 Rama, do thou, for living out the 
term of thy banishment, dwell either here or with me.” 
Bharadwaja entertained his welcome guest, Rlma, along 
with his wife and brother by extending towards them every 
rite of hospitality. And at Prayiga R2Lma having obtained 
the company of that Maharshi, and discoursing on a variety 
of sacred topics, the night came on. And with Sit! for the 
third, K&kutstha brought up in luxury, being fatigued, 
pleasantly spent that night at the romantic hermitage of 
Bharadw&ja. When the night had passed away and day 
dawned, (Rama) approached BharadwSja, and that chief of 
men addressed that ascetic of flaming energy, — “O reverend 
sire of truthful character, we have here in thy asylum spent 
the night. Do thou now permit us to set forward (for 
Chitrakuta).” Oh R§ma having passed the night there, 
Bharadwaja spoke unto him, — “Do thou trace thy steps to 
Chitrakuta filled with delicious fruits and roots. 1 deem that, O 
mighty R£ma, as a fit abode for thee, being, as it is, furnished 
with various kinds of trees, inhabited by crowds of Kinnaras, 
resounding with the cries of peacocks, and frequented by 
gignantic elephants. Do thou repair unto the famed Chitra- 
kuta, holy, fair to the view, and abounding in countless fruits 
and roots. And in those forests range herds of elephants 
and deer ; and these, O RSghava, thou wilt behold. And 
ranging with Sit SI rivers and rills and plateaus, caverns and 
fountains, thy mind will experience delight. Delighted 
with the notes of joyous Koyastivas and coels, and the cries 
of deer and countless mad elephants, do thou, arriving at the 
auspicious mountain, reside at that romantic asylum/' 

44 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




34 $ 



RAMA FA NA . 



SECTION LV. 



Having spent the night there, those princes — repressors 
of their foes — after paying their obeisance unto* the Mahar- 
sbi, set out for the mountain. And seeing them about to 
set forth, that Maharshi performed a propitiatory ceremony 
for them, even’ as a father does on behalf of the sons begot 
from his own loins. And that mighty ascetic, BharadwSja 
having truth for his prowess, addressed them, saying, — “O 
best of men, do you coming to the confluence of the Ganga 
and the Yamuna proceed along the Kaiindi river flowing 
westwards. Arriving at the Kaiindi running in a contrary 
direction, you will, O R5ghava, behold a goodly bathing place 
well-worn by foot-passengers. There constructing a raft, 
do you cross over the river who is the daughter of the Sun. 
Next coming to a gigantic banian tree with green foliage, 
named SySma, surrounded by various trees and inhabited by 
ascetics of accomplished purposes, let Sit a with joined hands 
offer humble supplications to it. Having come to the tree 
and, whether staying under it or proceeding along, after 
passing only a Krosa , you will, O Rama, see a wood abound- 
ing in Sallakis, Vadaris, and other wild trees belonging unto 
the Yamuna. I went to Chitrakuta many a time by that 
road, which is beautiful, sandy, and free from forest-fire.’' 
Having directed the way, the Maharshi paused. Thereupon 
Rima, saying, — "So be it,” asked him to stop. On the as- 
cetic turning away, Rama spoke unto Lakshmana, <# We had 
surely acquired religious merit, good betide you, since, the 
ascetic has shown compassion unto us.' 1 Having thus con- 
versed with each other, those foremost of men endowed 
with intelligence, placing Sita in their front, proceeded to- 
wards the river Kaiindi. And having arrived at the Kaiindi 
of rapid currents, they desirous of crossing over, began to 
think (as to the means). Then with heaps of dry wild wood 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




AYODHYAKANDAM. 



347 



covered with grass, they constructed a large raft. And the 
puissant Lakshmana tearing twigs from the ratan and the 
rose-apple, made a comfortable seat for Si ta. Then Da$a- 
ratha’s son, Rama, made his bashful wife (in power) incon- 
ceivable like unto Sree herself, ascend the raft, and carefully 
laid beside Vaidehi her attires and ornaments as well as the 
hoe and the basket. And first having placed Sita on the raft, 
those sons of Da^aratha ascended themselves, and with glad 
hearts began carefully to cross (the stream). Having come 
near the middle of the Kalindi, Sita prayed unto her, saying, 
— ‘ Hail to thee, O goddess ! I cross thee. If my husband 
can successfully perform his vow, I will worship thee with a 
thousand cows and an hundred vessels of wine, hail unto 
thee, upon Rama's return to the city ruled by Ikshwaku.” 
Having thus prayed to 'Kalindi with joined hands, that 
virtuous lady, Sita, reached the southern bank thereof. And 
by means of that raft they crossed that fleet-coursing daughter 
of the Sun, heaving with billows — the river Yamuna with 
her banks abounding with innumerable trees. Then renounc- 
ing the raft, and passing by the woods adjoining the Yamuna, 
they came upon a banian SyamSL by name, of cool shade and 
verdant foliage. On coming to the banian, Vaidehi saluted 
it saying, — “O mighty tree, I bow unto thee. May my hus- 
band fulfil his vow ; and may we hehold Kau^alya and the 
illustrious Sumitra.” Having thus prayed with joined hands, 
the intelligent Sita went away. Seeing the blameless and 
beloved Sita ever conducting herself properly, — praying, 
Rama said unto Lakshmana, “Do thou, O younger brother of 
Bharata, taking Sita with thee, go forward. O best of men, 
furnished with weapons, I will go in thy wake. Do thou 
procure Vaidehi with whatever fruits or flowers may please 
her and she may wish to have.” Seeing every tree and shrub 
crowned with blossoms unseen before, that one belonging 
to the softer sex questioned Rama about it. And hearingT 
Sita's words, Lakshmana brought unto her (fruits and flowers) 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




-* -■ red with grass. 



uni Lakshmana : 

-apple, aade a 
.a’s sow, Rama, made iee- 



" ,a ^ c She unto Sree 

^ * beside Yaidehi her at t ir e , 
; and the basket And fes: 



^ ise sons of Da^sratha acrwnr,. 
_ arts began car: iiOy to 
^ JU* the middle of the KaliniL El. 
: _ '‘Hall to thee, 0 goddes- 
“ZT n saccessfully perform his tut 
J^ jousand cows and an 
lee, upon Rama’s return r 
J laving thus prayed to ~Oi — 
J irtuous lady, SitS, reacbec tz - 



y means of that raft the} cn^ 
»f the Sun, heaving win 
ler banks abounding wuh 
ing the raft, and passirc m - 
they came upon a hane: :ir . 
^ant foliage. Oi 
ng, — *‘0 mighr r*. 
ulfil his worn: ~ ? — 



HIS 




L 



348 



RAMA YANA. 



of beautiful and flower-scattering trees of divers kinds. And 
beholding streams with water flowing over glittering sands 
and resounding with cranes of various kinds, the daughter of 
king Janaka felt exceeding delight. And having proceeded 
just a Krosa , those brothers, R&ma and Lakshmana, having 
killed many a sacred deer, began to range in the woods 
of the Yamuna. And having disported in the beautiful woods 
resounding with multitudes of peacocks and inhabited by 
elephants and monkeys, they looking as lively as ever, coming 
to the level banks of the river, took up their quarters there. 



SECTION* LVI. 



W hen the night had been spent, that best of Raghus 
gently awakened Lakshmana from his light sleep. “O Sumi- 
tra’s son, do thou hear the dulcet notes of the birds in the 
woods. Let us proceed. O repressor of foes, the time of 
our departure is present.” Awakened at the proper time, 
Rlma’s brother left off sleep and drowsiness and clinging 
fatigue. Then they all arising touched the sacred waters of 
the river, and began to proceed on the way to Chitrakuta 
inhabited by ascetics. Setting out in season with 
SumitrS’s son, he of eyes resembling lotus-petals spoke these 
words unto Sit &, — ”0 Vaidehi, behold these flowering trees, 
the Kinsukas in spring appearing engarlanded with their own 
flowers, and as if flaming. — Do thou behold the BhalULtakas 
and Vilwas bending beneath their fruits and flowers, with no 
man to enjoy them. Surely, we shall be able to live here. 
Behold, O Lakshmana, these honeycombs measuring about 
a Drona have been hung up on trees by the bees. In the 
charming woods overarched by flowers, the Ddtyuha cries, 
and is responded to by the peacock. Do thou behold Chitra- 
kuta frequented by mad elephants and resonant with the 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHY A KA ND A M. 



349 



voice of multitudes of birds — the mountain with its towering 
summits. O child, we will disport in the sacred woods of 
Chitrakuta with fine level plains, and covered with divers trees.” 
Then they proceeding on foot along with Sita, arrived at the 
charming and beautiful mountain Chitrakuta. And arriving at 
the mountain inhabited by birds of various kinds, abounding 
in fruits and roots, and furnished with watery expanses, 
(Rima) said, “O amiable one, methinks this beautiful hill fur- 
nished with innumerable fruits and roots, is fraught with 
subsistence. And the hill is inhabited by high-souled ascetics. 
Let this, O child, be our abode. We will dwell here.” Then 
R§ma, Lakshmana and Sit& with joined hands presented 
themselves at the asylum of VSlmiki and saluted him.” There- 
at the Maharshi cognizant of morality said unto them, 
"Be seated !” and addressed Rama, saying, — "Has thy jour- 
ney been a pleasant one ?” Then having duly acquainted the 
saint with matters pertaining to himself, that lord, the mighty- 
armed elder brother of Lakshmana, said unto the latter, “O 
Lakshmana, bring thou wood good and strong. O amiable 
one, construct a dwelling. My mind is set upon staying 
here.” Hearing his words, Sumitri’s son procured wood of 
various descriptions, and then that subduer of foes reared a 
cottage thatched with leaves. Beholding that goodly dwelling 
walled with wood and furnished with doors, R§ma addressed 
these words unto Lakshmana, intent upon ministering unto 
his brother. "Procuring meat, we will worship the deity 
presiding over this dwelling. O SuraitrS's son, those who wish 
to live long, should pacify the household gods. O Lakshmana 
graced with auspicious eyes, do thou killing deer, swiftly 
bring it here. It behoves us to observe the rules prescribed 
by the scriptures. Do thou follow the ordinance.” Acquainted 
with the words of his brother, Lakshmana, slayer of hostile 
heroes, did as he was told. Thereupon Rlma addressed him 
again, "Do thou cook this meat. We will worship the pre- 
siding deities of this mansion. Bestir thyself, — the moment 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




350 



RAM A YANA. 



is mild and the day is styled Dhruva Then Lakshmana the 
son of Sumitrii endowed with vigor, having slain a sacred 
black deer, threw it into flaming fire. And seeing it well 
scorched and hot and free from blood, Lakshmana spoke unto 
that foremost of men, Rlghava, saying, — “Here is the entire 
black deer roasted by me, capable of serving any purpose. 
Do you, O you that resemble a celestial, worship the gods." 
Having performed his ablutions, R&ma conversant with the 
ritual and possessing a knowledge of Japa , restraining his 
senses, performed all the mantras that are necessary for com- 
pleting a sacrifice ; and having in a pure spirit communed 
with all the deities, entered the habitation. And (this having 
been done), Rama of immeasurable energy rejoiced exceed- 
ingly. And sacrificing unto Vaicya, Rudra and Vishnu, he 
performed some ceremonies for removing malign influences 
from the abode. And having duly performed Japa and bathed 
in consonance with the ordinance, Rama made an excellent 
sacrifice for removing sin. And then Rflghava established a 
dais, and a chaitya proportionate to the abode * And as the 
celestials enter the hall entitled SudharmA, they together 
with the view of dwelling in it, entered the mansion beautiful 
to behold, thatched with the leaves of trees, built at a conve- 
nient site, well-made, and keeping out the wind.t And having 
come to the charming Chitrakuta and the river Mjlyavati 
furnished with excellent bathing places, and haunted by beasts 
and fowls, they rejoiced with glad hearts, and forsook the 
grief incident to their exile from the city. 

* The N. W. P. text reads . — “And in that romantic forest abounding in 
various kinds of beasts and birds, with trees bearing a profusion of variegated 
flowers, and resounding with the roars of beasts and serpents, those ones and, 
who had conquered their senses, began to live happily.”— T. 

f Another reading is . — “And having with garlands made of wild flowers, 
fruits, roots, meat cooked according to the ordinance, water, Japa as pre- 
scribed by the Veda, grass, and faggot, worshipped the spirits, those descend- 
ants of Raghu, the auspicious Rhma and Lakshmana, in company with SiU 
entered the graceful mansion.” — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 



A VODHYA KA NDAM. 



35 * 



SECTION LVl I. 



Having for a long time conversed with Sumantra, Guha 
distressed at heart on Rama reaching the southern bank, 
retraced his steps homewards. Learning from envoys at 
(Sringaverapura) all about Rama's visit to Bharadwa^a at 
Prayaga and his reception (at Bharadw&ja's place) as well as 
their destined journey (to Chitrakuta), Sumantra, taking the 
permission (of Guha), yoked those excellent horses and with 
a heavy heart directed his course to the city of Ayodhya. 
And beholding perfumed woods and rivers and watery 
expanses and towns and villages, he eagerly proceeded on 
his way. And on the third day at dusk the charioteer 
arriving at AyodhySl saw it bereft of happiness. And behold- 
ing it empty and still, Sumantra afflicted with exceeding 
sorrow, and overwhelmed with grief, thought, “Perhaps the 
city with her elephants and horses and men and king has 
been consumed by the fire of grief on account of RUma.” 
Having thus reflected, the charioteer drawing up to the city- 
gate by means of those fleet-coursing horses, speedily 
entered the city. Thereupon, people by hundreds and 
thousands rushed after the charioteer, Sumantra, asking, 
“Where is RSma?” To them he replied,— “Having asked 
R&ghava on the Ganglfc and being permitted by him, I have 
been sent away by that high-souled righteous one.” Learning 
that they (R5Lma and the rest) had crossed over (the Gang§), 
the men with tears in their eyes, sighed forth “O fie !” and 
began to bewail, exclaiming, “Ah R5ma.” And he heard 
crowds exclaim, — “Not seeing R&ma in the car, we cease to 
exist. We shall no longer see the righteous RSma in the 
midst of mighty assemblies engaged in charity, sacrifice or 
nuptial rites. What was necessary for this body? What 
was dear to them and what did they delight in ?— (constantly 
revolving all this in his mind), R*ma ruled this city even as, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




35 * 



RAMA VAN A. 



a father.” Then proceeding past the stalls, Sumantra heard 
the lamentations of females at windows, burning in grief for 
R5ma. With his face muffled, Sumantra proceeded on the 
highway towards the palace of Da 9 aratha. Swiftly alighting 
from the car and entering the royal residence, he went 
past seven apartments thronged with people. And beholding 
Sumantra returned to the city crowned with edifices, seven- 
storied houses, and palatial mansions, the women, stricken 
with the absence of R3ma, set up a cry of “Oh" and “Alas." 
And waxing still more aggrieved, the females looked at each 
other with their expansive and transparent eyes fast flooded 
with tears. And then he heard the talk, as toned down h 
proceeded from the royal. mansions, of the wives of Da 9 aratha 
afflicted with grief for R&ma. “Going in company with 
Rim a, and returning without him, what will the charioteer 
answer Kau 9 alyl bewailing (for her son) ? Surely life is 
miserable, yet is incapable of being renounced, since, although 
her son leaving (the installation) hath gone^ away, yet 
Kau9aly5 still liveth.” Having heard those words of the 
queens, fraught with truth, Sumantra burning as it were 
in grief, at once entered the (next) apartment. And entering 
the eighth apartment lie beheld in a gloomy chamber the 
king distressed and in a pitiable plight, woe-begone for grief 
for his son. Thereupon presenting himself before tLe 
monarch, Sumantra saluted him and then conveyed unto the 
king the words of Rlma as he had uttered them. Hearing 
them silently, the monarch with his mind exceedingly 
wrought, dropped down to the ground in a swoon, afflicted 
with grief for Rlma. On the lord of earth swooning away 
and falling to the ground, the inmates of the inner apartment 
raising their arms burst into lamentations. Kau 9 alySL availing 
herself of the aid of Sumantra, raised up her fallen lord and 
addressed him, saying, “This, O eminently virtuous one, is 
the envoy of that one of an exceedingly arduous achievement 
returned from the forest. Why do you not accost him ? 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A FODHYA KA NDAM. 



353 



O descendant of Raghu, you are ashamed to-day, having done 
this wrong. Do you rise : merit be yours (arising from this 
act.) Let not your adherents come to naught (because of 
your sorrow). O worshipful one, she from fear of whom 
you do not speak to the charioteer, Kaikeyi, is not here. 
Do you therefore speak to him without fear.” Having said 
this unto the monarch, Kau^alyi overwhelmed with grief, 
with her voice oppressed with the vapour begot of emotion, 
all on a sudden fell to the earth. Beholding Kau?aly& fallen 
on the ground bewailing, as also their husband, the ladies 
seated around, began to lament. Hearing the sounds of 
wailing arise from the inner apartment, old and young as 
well as females, set up lamentations all round ; and the city 
was again filled with them. 



SECTION L VII t. 



When having been ministered unto and when his senses 
had returned after the swoon, the king summoned Sumantra 
for hearing tidings of R&ma. Thereupon the charitoteer 
with joined hands spoke unto the mighty monarch, lament- 
ing for Rima, influenced by grief and sorrow, aged, burning 
in grief, like a newly-taken elephant, sighing heavily, plung- 
ed in thought, and resembling an elephant that is indisposed. 
Then the king like one exceedingly distressed, spoke unto 
the charioteer, who had presented himself, covered over with 
dust, with tears starting from his eyes, and in pitiable guise, 
“Where stayeth that righteous one, taking refuge under a 
tree ? Lapped in luxury, what, O charioteer, will RSghava 
feed on ? Unworthy of privations, and worthy of excellent 
beds, how, O Sumantra, a king’s son, he is sleeping on the 
ground like one forlorn ? How is Rima passing his days in 
the lone forest — he who when he went out used to be followed 
45 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




35*4 



RAMAYANA . 



by foot-men and elephants ? How are the princes in com- 
pany with Vaidehi, living in the woods y ranged by serpents 
and beasts and inhabited by black snakes ? How, O Suman- 
tra, having descended from the car, the princes along with 
the tender and unfortunate Sit& are proceeding on foot ? O 
charioteer, surely thou art blessed, for thou hast beheld my 
sons enter the forest, like the Aswins entering the Mandara 
hill. And what did R&ma say ? And what did Lakshmana? 
And, O Sumantra, arriving at the forest what did Mithi&’s 
daughter ? Do thou, O charioteer, describe unto me what R2ma 
lives on and where he lies down. Hearing this, I shall live, 
like Yayati in the midst of saints.” Thus urged by the king, 
the charioteer spoke unto the king with his voice faltering 
and suppressed with the vapour of grief, “O mighty monarch 
observing morality, R&ghava with joined hands and bowing 
down his head, said, ‘O charioteer, do thou in my name 
salute with thy head the feet of my high-soulded sire worthy 
of being saluted, and famed (in the world). And, O chariot- 
eer, do thou in my name as each deserves salute the ladies 
of the inner apartment and communicate to them tidings 
of my health. And having saluted my mother Kau9aly§ 
and conveyed unto her news of my welfare, as well as of my 
unswerving adherence to morality, do thou tell her these 
words, — Do you remaining steady in virtue, at the proper 
hour bestir yourself in behalf of the chamber of sacrificial 
fire. And, O revered one, do you minister unto the feet 
of that worshipful one, (the king), as if they were very 
deities. And banishing pride and self-love, do you bear 
yourself towards my mothers. And, O mother, do you show 
respect unto Kaikeyi, who is followed by the king himself. 
And you should behave towards Bharata as one should 
towards one’s king. Kings (although juveline), are really 
senior by virtue of their royalty ; and do you remember the 
duties touching sovereigns/— Do thou communicate unto 
Bharata news of my welfare and say in my name, — Do you 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KAN DA M. 



355 



behave properly with all your mothers. — And unto that 
delight of the Ikswh&ku line do thou further say, — Having 
been installed as the heir-apparent, be you, looking upon the 
king as the supreme authority in the state, obedient to him. 
Do you not deprive the king of authority, as he has grown old. 
O Prince, do you grant him satisfaction in the kingdom and 
do you proclaim his mandates. — And shedding copious tears, 
he again addressed me, saying, — Do thou look upon my mother 
as on thy own proud of her son. — Having said this, the 
mighty-armed and illustrious R&ma furnished with eyes re- 
sembling lotus-petals, shed plenteous tears. Thereupon Laksh- 
mana waxing wroth, breathing hard, said, — For what fault 
of his has the Prince been banished ? Observing the worthless 
command of Kaikeyi, whether the king has done well or ill, 
we have been exceedingly pained thereby. Whether RSLma 
has been exiled through Kaikeyi's lust for dominion or through 
the exigencies of the bestowal of the boon, there cannot be 
any doubt that the king has acted most unrighteously. Even 
if this hath been done in harmony with the wish of the Lord, I 
do not perceive any reason for the banishment of Rama. 
The king through lack of sense has done heedlessly what 
is opposed to morality; and this banishment of Rama will 
but bring upon him woe here and hereafter. Fatherhood 
find I none in the monarch. My brother and feeder and friend 
and father is even Raghava. Renouncing one that is uni- 
versally dear, and that is ever engaged in the good of all* 
how by such an act will the king please the people ? And* 
how by banishing the righteous Rama dear unto all the 
subjects, and thus withstanding the wishes of all, will he 
retain his royalty ? — And, O mighty monarch, Janaki also* 
unfortunate that she is, sighing heavily, stood wildered like 
one that had been possessed. And not having experienced 
any calamity before, the famed princess weeping because of 
this misfortune, told me nothing. And looking up to her 
lord with a blank countenance, she suddenly let fall tears. 



Digitize^ by . >ogle 




35 <> 



RAMA FAN A. 



perceiving the destruction of the subjects. And thus said 
R3ma ministered unto by Lakshmana t with a tearful counte- 
nance ; and thus stood the unfortunate and weeping Sit5 
beholding the royal car and myself.” 



SECTION LiX. 



On RSma having gone to the forest, my horses as I 
turned away, did not proceed vigorously on the way, and shed 
warm tears. And having (done homage) unto both the 
princes by joining my hands, I turned my back, bearing as 
best I could that load of sorrow. Indulging in the hope that 
Rlma might again summon me by any of the envoys (of Guha 
left there), I stayed there with Guha for many days. In tby 
dominions, O monarch, exercised by the calamity that has 
befallen R£ma, even trees bearing blossoms and buds and 
sprouts look sad ; the rivers and pools and liquid lapses have 
their waters dried up ; and the woods and groves have their 
foliage withered. Creatures do not move and beasts of prey 
cease to range about ; and the forest appears to be dumb, 
stupified by grief on account of R£ma. And streams contain- 
ing lotuses with their leaves shriveled, have their waters 
stained ; and lotuses have their leaves burnt ; and fishes and 
(aquatic) birds have grown lean. And flowers both on land and 
water have been deprived of their freshness ;and fragrance ; 
and they no longer retain their former condition. And 
the gardens are idle with their birds drooping. And, O best 
of men, I do not find the bowers beautiful (as before). And 
when I entered AyodhyH, none greeted me. And not seeing 
R&ma, the people sigh momentarily. And, O revered one, 
seeing the royal car returned hither without R&ma, the people 
on the highways from grief appear with tearful countenances. 
And from mansions, cars, and lorldly edifices, ladies seeing 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYAKANDAM . 



357 



the car come back > set up a chorus of 'Ah* and ‘Alas/ afflicted 
with the absence of RAma. And becoming more distressed 
than ever, the fair sex with their expansive and clear eyes 
filled with tears, began to eye each other indistinctly. And 
in consequence of the general grief that prevailed, I could not 
perceive any difference between friends and foes and persons 
indifferent. O mighty monarch, distressed in consequence of 
the exile of RAma, men appear sunk in dejection, and elephants 
and horses are spiritless ; and seized with cheerlessness, 
they utter doleful sounds and heave profound sighs. AyodhyA 
appeareth unto me joyless like KaucalyA deprived of her 
son.” Hearing the words of the charioteer, the king like one 
exceedingly forlorn, addressed the former in words lost in the 
vapour of sorrow, “Exhorted by Kaikeyi of a sinful country, 
born in a sinful race and cherishing sinful designs, I did not 
take counsel with aged people capable of offering advice. With- 
out consulting with friends or courtiers or persons versed in the 
Vedas, I have in the interests of a woman rashly done this 
thing through ignorance. Meseems, O charioteer, for the pur- 
pose of destroying this line entirely, this mighty disaster hath 
surely befallen us through the influence of Destiny. O chari- 
oteer, if I have ever done thee any good, do thou immediately 
take me to RAma : my life urges me on (in this direction). Or 
let my command make RAghava turn back. I cannot live for a 
moment without RAma. But if that mighty-armed one has 
proceeded far, do thou placing me on a car speedily show me 
unto RAma. Where is that elder brother of Lakshmana of a 
mighty bow, furnished with teeth resembling Kunda flowers ? 
If I live so long, I will behold him in company with SitSL. 
What can be sadder than this, that reduced to such a pass, 
I cannot see here that descendant of IkshwAku, RAghava ? 
Ah RAma 1 Ah thou younger brother of RAma J Ah thou 
unfortunate Vaidehi ! You do not know that I am through 
grief lamenting like one deserted.” Deprived of his cons* 
ciousness through that sorrow of his, the king said, “I have 



Digitized by 



Google 




35 ^ 



RAMHVANA. 



plunged myself into this ocean of woe hard to cross, with 
grief for R£ma as its mighty tide ; separation from Sit2, its 
other shore; sighs heaved, its furious billows and whirlpools; 
tears, rivers that rush into it ; tossing of the arms, its fishes ; 
lamentations its roar ; my hair flung about, its moss ; Kaikeyi, 
its submarine fire ; my fast-flowing tears, its current ; 
the words of the hump-backed one, its terrific ravenous 
animals ; the boon, its continents ; and the exile of R§ma, its 
expanse. And, O KaucalyS, without R&ghava, I shall sink 
in this ocean. O exalted dame, living, it is hard for me to 
cross over this ocean. It is surely owing to my sin that to- 
day wishing to behold RSghava and Lakshmana, I do not get 
them (before me).” Having thus lamented, the illustrious king 
all of a sudden dropped to the earth in a swoon. On the king 
swooning away lamenting, that exalted lady, R£ma’s mother, 
hearing his words doubly bitter and more piteous than ever 
uttered for Rlma, was seized with fresh apprehension. 



SECTION LX. 



Then like one possessed by an evil spirit, and trembling 
again and again, Kau^alyi lying down on the ground like 
one dead, spoke unto the charioteer, saying, “Do thou take 
me where KSLkutstha is and Siti and Lakshmana : without 
them, I cannot live for a moment. Do thou without delay 
turn the car. Do thou take me also unto Dandaka. If I do 
not follow them, I shall repair to the mansion of Yama.” There- 
at the charioteer with joined hands comforted that exalted lady 
with ready words faltering and choked with rising vapour, 
“Do you leave grief and sorrow and the violent emotion. 
Renouncing grief, Rlghava is living in the woods. And in the 
forest, the righteous Lakshmana, having his senses under 
control, is ministering unto RSma’s feet and is thus adoring 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KAN DA M. 



359 



the gods (or happiness in the next world. And even in the 
lonely woods, Site as if remaining at home, having fixed her 
thoughts on Rlma, is living a life of love. And there appears 
not the least trace of any distress afflicting her ; and Vaidehi 
seems to me as if she were meant (by Nature) for a life 
away from home. And as formerly going unto urban villas 
she disported, she disports now even in the lonely forest. 
And although living in the lone forest, that one of a counte- 
nance resembling the infant moon, sports merrily like a 
girl, in the garden represented by R&ma's self. AyodhyS 
without Rama would have seemed a wilderness to her whose 
heart is fixed on him and whose very life depends upon him. 
Vaidehi is now asking (R«Lma) concerning the villages and 
towns (in their way) ; and observing various trees and the 
courses of the rivers, J&naki, asking R&ma or Lakshmana 
(for information), is learning all about them. And Site sports 
as she used to do in arbours stationed at the distance of 
only one krosa from Ayodhyi. This only I remember ; but 
all that she had from sudden impulse communicated unto 
me concerning Kaikeyi, does not rise into consciousness. ,, 
Suppressing this topic which had come up through heedless- 
ness, the charioteer spoke sweet words cheering up that 
noble lady. “Neither through the fatigue of travel, nor the 
influence of the wind, nor excitement, nor the sun, hath 
Vaidehi's lustre resembling the lunar light suffered any 
diminution. The countenance of that fair-speaking one 
resembling the lotus and comparable unto the full moon 
in splendour, hath not waxed pale. Her feet now without 
the dye of the liquid lac, but naturally furnished with the 
roseate hue of the same, are gorgeous like lotus buds. 
Still Vaidehi decked in ornaments from affection for Rlma, 
goes gracefully, rebuking with her bangles the wavy gait 
(of cranes). Supporting herself on R&ma’s arm, Site arrived 
at the forest, is not inspired with fear on beholding either 
an elephant, or a lion, or a tiger. Therefore they are not to be 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




RAMA YANA . 



360 

bewailed, nor your own self, nor the lord of men. This 
history of R§ma will endure for ever in this world. Renounc- 
ing grief and with cheerful hearts, well established in the 
life led by the Maharshis, they living in the forest on wild 
fruits as their sustenance, are maintaining the noble promise 
of their sire.” Consoled by the truth-telling yet sweet- 
speeched charioteer, that lady oppressed with grief for 
her son, ceased not to wail loudly — “My beloved,” “My son/' 
“RSghava.” 



SECTION LX l« 



On that foremost of those capable of charming people, 
the righteous R&ma, repairing to the forest, Kaucalyk crying 
in grief said unto her husband, “Your great fame has spread 
over the three worlds ; and the descendant of Raghu is kind, 
munificent and fair-speaking. Why then have you forsaken 
those foremost of men along with Siti? Brought up in 
happiness, and now brought to misery, how can they bear it ? 
And how can the youthful daughter of Mithitt of slender 
make, tender, and deserving of happiness, bear heat and cold ? 
Having formerly partaken of (excellent) rice with curries, how 
will Sit& feed on wild rice ? Having heard excellent vocal and 
instrumental music, how will Sit& hear the frightful cries of 
carnivorous lions ? Resembling the gonfalon of the great ladra, 
where sleepeth the mighty-armed and exceedingly powerfa) 
R&ma, making his arm like unto a mace his pillow ? When 
shall 1 behold Rkma’s countenance hued like the lotus, with 
his hair ending beautifully (in curls), and his breath impreg- 
nated with the fine perfume of the lotus, and his eyes resembl- 
ing lotus leaves ? Surely my heart, without doubt, is made of 
the essence of the thunderbolt, since not beholding him, it is 
not cracked in a thousand fragments. It is because of 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




A YODHVA KANDA M. 



361 



your sad act that mine own, being thwarted, although worthy 
of happiness, are miserably ranging the wilderness. If after 
the expiration of the five and ten years, R3ghava does return, 
it does not appear likely that Bharata will renounce the 
kingdom and the exchequer. Some on the occasions of the 
Sr&ddha (first) feast their own friends, and having done this, 
they mind the choice Brahmanas. But those twice-born 
ones that are meritorious, learned, and like unto celestials, do 
not at the last moment regard even viands resembling am- 
brosia. Br&hmanas of high respectibility endowed with 
wisdom never bear being entertained after the other twice- 
born ones have been feasted, even as bulls never quietly bear 
to have their horns cut off. Why will not an elder brother 
and one who has sterling merits, O monarch, disregard a 
kingdom which hath been thus enjoyed by his younger 
brother ? A tiger doth not like to feed on food procured by 
others. Even so that tiger-like personage does not regard 
anything that has come to be tasted by another. Clarified 
butter, sacrificial cakes, Ku£a, stakes of catechu having been 
used in one sacrifice cannot be used in another,— even so 
this kingdom which hath been already enjoyed, like unto 
liquor deprived of its essence or a sacrifice whose soma hath 
been eaten, cannot be accepted by R&ma. Such an ill treat- 
ment R&ghava will not put up with, even as # a powerful tiger 
cannot bear the rubbing of its tail (by another). This world 
aided by the gods fear to encounter him in high conflict ; 
but he restrains himself, thinking any such Action on his part as 
unrighteous. Indeed, that righteous one brings back people 
to morality. Surely, that mighty-armed one endowed with 
exceeding prowess, can with his golden shafts burn all crea- 
tures and the oceans, like the Day at the dissolution of all. But 
such a man of men, possessed of leonine strength, and graced 
with the eyes of a bull, has been destroyed by his father, 
like a fish destroying his offspring. If you had believed in the 
morality prescribed in the scriptures, and which is followed 
46 



Digitized by 



Google 







RAM AY A ft A. 



by the twice-born ones, you would not have banished your 
son. But disregarding such morality, you have banished 
your virtuous son. One of the refuges of a woman is her 
husband, a second is her son, and a third is her relatives ; and 
a fourth she has none. But you cease to be mine ; and Rlma 
has been sent to the woods. I do not like to go into the 
forest ; so I am entirely undone by you. This kingdom, your 
own kingdom, has been destroyed by you ; destroyed are all 
along with the counsellors ; destroyed am I with my son ; and 
destroyed are the citizens : your son and your wife are alone 
delighted. ,, Hearing these words uttered in heart-rending 
accents, Dacaratha exceedingly distressed, became senseless. 
And being afflicted with grief, he again remembered his evil 
act. 



SECTION LXII. 



Thus harshly addressed by the indignant mother of R&ma, 
the king aggrieved was plunged in thought. Having thought 
for a long while, that repressor of foes, the king, who had 
lost his senses through grief, regained consciousness. And 
having regained his senses, he sighing hot and hard, seeing 
Kau£aly& beside him, was again lost in thought. As he was 
thinking, the sinful act which he had through ignorance 
formerly committed by means of the shaft which hits by 
sound, rose up (in his recollection). Afflicted with this grief as 
well as that on account of R&ma, that lord, the king, burned 
in these two several griefs. Burning in grief and distressed, he 
trembling and with joined hands, with his head hanging 
down, addressed KaugalyS, with the view of pacifying her, 
“I deprecate thy displeasure, O Kau^alyft, with joined hands. 
Thou art ever affectionate and dost not treat harshly even 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYAKANDAM \ 



3^3 



enemies. Verily unto women cognizant of virtue, a husband, 
whether he has any merits or not, is a very deity. Ever virtu- 
ous, thou, that hast seen both the virtuous and the vicious, al- 
though aggrieved, ought not to say anything unpleasant 
unto me who am weighed down with woe.” Having heard 
these piteous words of the distressed king, Kau9aly& uttered 
words even as a water-way lets out fresh accession of rain. 
And weeping, she drew on her head the joined hands of the 
king resembling lotuses ; and then flurried spoke these words 
hurriedly informed with extreme affection, “Be thou propi- 
tious ; I beseech with (bended) head. I bow unto thee, 
falling on the ground. O reverend one, besought by thee, 
I shall be undone. I do not deserve to be forgiven by 
thee. She cannot be reckoned a gentlewoman, who is 
propitiated by her intelligent husband, worthy of being ex- 
tolled in both the worlds. I know duty, O righteous one ; 
I know that thou art truth-telling. And it is because I was 
exceedingly distressed on account of my son that I spoke 
harshly to thee. Sorrow destroys patience, sorrow destroys 
knowledge of the scriptures, sorrow destroys every thing ; 
there is no enemy like unto sorrow. One can falling down bear 
heating from an enemy ; but one cannot falling down bear 
ever so little sorrow. This is the fifth night of the banishment 
of RAma, as calculated by me ; and to me rendered cheerless 
by sorrow, this interval has assumed the proportions of five 
years. And fostered by thought on my part, this grief in* 
creases in my bosom, like the mighty waters of the ocean 
increased by the vehement discharge of rivers.” As Kau^alyA 
was thus speaking auspiciously, the rays of the sun grew 
milder, and the night arrived. Cheered up by the words 
of Kau£aly&, the king overcome by grief, felt the influence 
of sleep. 



Digitized by 



Google 




3^4 



RAMAYANA. 



SECTION LXIII. 

Starting in a moment from sleep, king Dacaratha deprived 
(almost) of his consciousness by grief, (again) became a prey to 
thought. And in consequence of the exile of Rlma and Laksh- 
mana, the king resembling Vasava was overpowered by grief, 
like the darkness of Rlhu enveloping the sun. Then on R£ma’s 
having gone along with his wife, the lord of the Ko9alas, re- 
membering his own misdeed, felt anxious to communicate 
himself to that lady having her eyes furnished with dark outer 
corners. And on the sixth night after R&ma had repaired to the 
forest, the king Dacaratha, when it was midnight, remembered 
his own unrighteous act. And then unto Kau£aly& aggrieved on 
account of her son, he spoke these words, “As are the actions 
of one, O auspicious one — whether good or otherwise — 
are the consequences, O gentle lady, reaped by the doer 
of them. He that on the eve of beginning an action 
either relating to this world or the next, does not 
take into consideration the fact that actions entail con- 
sequences light or grave, disagreeable (or otherwise), is 
styled a child. He that cutting down a mango grove, waters 
Pal&sa trees, beholding the flowers (blooming), will covet 
fruits ; and grieve when their season arrives. The person 
that without apprehending (the principle of causation) rushes 
to action, grieves at the season of fruits, even like him 
that watereth kinsuka trees (hewing down his mango grove). 
And in this way, I fool that I am having hewn down my grove of 
mangos and watered Pallas, — having renounced R&ma in the 
season of fruit, is grieving in the end. Having, O KautalyS, 
earned the expression — ‘The Prince can pierce his aim by 
sound alone/— I, a prince and bowman, did this offence. There- 
fore, O noble dame, I have myself brought this misfortune on 
me, like a child who has eaten poison through ignorance. And 
even like another person fascinated by the sight of some 



Digitized by 



Google 




A VODHYAKANDAM. 



3*5 

Pal&sa trees (and doing as mentioned above), I (did this act) 
not foreknowing the consequence that would follow my shoot- 
ing by sound. O lady, thou wert then unwedded ; and I was a 
youthful prince. And it was at this time that the rainy season 
increasing ray desire set in. Drawing moisture from the 
ground and heated the earth by his rays, the Sun goes to the 
dreadful quarter whither repair the dead. The heat was im- 
mediately dispelled, and the gelid clouds showed themselves j 
and frogs and S&rangas and peacocks began to rejoice ; and, 
finding it unpleasant, the feathered ones bathed and with the 
surface of their plumage shrunk up from the wet, took refuge 
in trees shaken by the wind and rain. And the hill graced by 
maddened S&rangas, covered by showers falling simul- 
taneously looked like a mass of waters. And the waters 
although unstained, being mixed up with mineral substances 
and ashes from the mountain, flowed in serpentine torrents 
black and red. At such a sweet hour, I intent upon taking 
excercise, taking my bow and arrows and mounted on my 
car, sallied out for the river Sarayu, with the intention that 
I with my senses under control, should in the watery expense 
slay any bufifclo, elephant, or any other beast that might have 
come there in the night. And (coming there) while it was 
so dark that nothing could be discovered, I heard sounds 
of a Ailing pitcher proceeding from the waters ; resembl- 
ing the roars of an elephant. Thereupon raising up my 
shaft flaming and like unto a serpent of virulent poison, I 
desirous of hunting the (imaginary) elephant, let fly my shaft in 
the direction of the sound. Thereupon from the spot whereto 
the sharpened shaft resembling a poisonous snake had been 
discharged by me in the twilight, proceeded cries of ‘Oh* and 
‘Alas' uttered by a forester pierced to the quick by the arrow, 
and falling into the water. And when he had dropped down, 
words spoken by a human being became audible. ‘Why doth 
the weapon light upon me ? I had come to this lone stream 
for procuring water. By whom have I been wounded by 



Digitized by Google 




366 



RAMAYANA . 



this arrow ? To whom have I done wrong ? And how can the 
slaying of one like me bearing a load of matted locks, and wear- 
ing bark and deer-skin, who subsists on what the forest yields 
and never injures others, be sanctioned by the scriptures ? 
Who can serve any purpose by slaying me ? And how can I 
have injured such an one ? Such a purposeless act cannot but 
end in evil. This can never be reckoned as righteous even like 
unto violating the chastity of a preceptor’s wife. I do not so 
much lament my end as I lament it on account of my father 
and mother. To what will the old couple, who have ever 
been maintained by me, betake themselves when I am gone ? 
My father and mother are old, and I their only son is slain. 
What boy is it of uncontrolled senses that has killed us all ?* 
“Hearing his piteous words, I ever anxious to follow 
virtue, was exceedingly pained, and the bow with its arrow 
fixed fell down from my hand to the earth. Hearing in the 
night, the pathetic words of the saint thus lamenting, I 
became frightened, and was deprived of my senses through 
excess of grief. And coming to the quarter, I exceedingly 
unnerved and with an excited mind, discovered on the banks 
of the Sarayu an ascetic wounded with a shaft, with his mat- 
ted locks scattered about, his pitcher of water lying by, his 
body smeared with blood and dust and afflicted by the dart. 
Gazing with his eyes at me who was extremely agitated and ill 
at ease, he said these words sternly, as if consuming me with 
his energy, ‘What wrong, O monarch, had I residing in the 
woods done thee, that coming to procure water for my parents, 

I have been thus afflicted by thee ? By piercing my marrow 
with a shaft, thou hast slain both my aged and blind father and 
mother. Surely, they feeble and blind, who afflicted by thirst 
are remaining in expectation of me, will now bear (the stress 
and tension of) the expectation as well as the parching thirst. 
Surely asceticism and study carry no fruit with them, sioce 
I lying low on the ground, my father knows nothing about 
it. And what could he do, even if he knew it, being as he is 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KA NDA M. 



3^7 



incapable and unable to go about ? One tree cannot rescue 
another that is being batttered (by the winds). Do thou, O 
descendant of Raghu, thyself going to my father, speedily 
inform of him this that has occurred. But take care that like a 
fire waxing furious consuming a wood, he in his ire do not 
burn thee. This narrow way, O king, will lead thee unto my 
father’s dwelling. Do thou going there, pacify him, so that get- 
ting wroth he may not curse thee. Do thou (now), O king, take 
out the arrow. Thy sharpened shaft afflicts my marrow, like the 
tide of a river wearing away a hollow-heaving sand bank/ 
But touching the extracting of the arrow, this thought 
perplexed me : 'If the arrow is left alone, it pains ; if 

extracted, death ensues/ As I was distressed, aggrieved and 
afflicted with sorrow, the son of the ascetic perceived my 
anxiety. Thereupon that one well versed in the scriptures 
sinking motionless, with his eyes rolling upwards, and 
waxing extremely weak, said with difficulty, 'Restraining 
sorrow, I by dint of patience become calm. Do thou remove 
from thy mind the grief caused by the consciousness of having 
slain a Br&hmana. O king, I belong not to the twice-born 
race : let not thy mind be pained. O lord of the foremost 
men, I was begot by a Vaicya on a Sudra woman/ As he, 
his vitals afflicted with the shaft, his eyes rolling, inert and 
trembling on the ground, with his limbs drawn in, was 
speaking with difficulty, I drew out the arrow. Thereupon, 
looking at me, the ascetic, growing affrighted, gave up the 
ghost. On beholding him with his body dripping with water, 
and mortally wounded, and breathing hard without respite, 
after he had bewailed his mortal wound, lying on the 
banks of the Sarayu, I lamented him and was, O gentle 
lady, greatly aggrieved/’ 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




368 



RAMA YANA, 



SECTION L XI V. 

^Remembering the extraordinary death of the Maharshi, 
that righteous descendant of Raghu, lamenting his son, 
thus spoke unto Kau9aly5, “Having unwittingly committed 
that great sin, I, with my senses oppressed through grief, 
thought within myself as to how I could mend it. Then 
taking up the pitcher filled with excellent water, I went 
by the way mentioned and (at last) reached the asylum. 
There I found his aged, infirm, forlorn, parents, without any 
one to help them in moving about, — like unto birds whose 
wings have been severed, keeping up a talk about (their son) 
without experiencing any fatigue, and like helpless ones 
feeding on a hope which had been blasted by me. My senses 
overpowered by grief, and my consciousness almost lost 
through apprehension, I, arrived at the hermitage, was again 
overwhelmed with sorrow. Hearing my footsteps, the 
ascetic said, ‘Why, my son, delayest thou ? Bring the drink 
at once. Thy mother, O child, was exceedingly anxious in 
consequence of thy sporting in the waters. Do thou speedily 
enter the asylum. O child, it behoveth thee not to take to 
heart any unkind action that, O son, may have been done 
unto thee of high fame either by thy mother or myself. Thou 
art the resource of these helpless ones ; thou art the eyes 
of these bereft of their sight. Our lives are bound up with 
thee. Why dost not answer ?’ Seeing the ascetic with a 
choked utterance indistinctly speaking thus with the letters 
not articulated clearly, I, dashed in spirits, yet concealing the 
real state of my mind by assuming a doughty tongue, 
communicated unto him the danger that had beffallen him in 
consequence of the calamity of his son : ‘I am a Kshatriya, 

Da^aratha (by name), and no son of thine, O magnanimous one. 

I have come by a misfortune in consequence of an act blamed 
by the good. O revered one, desirous of killing some 



Digitized by Google 




A YODHYA KA NDA M. 



3 6 ^ 



beast of prey, an elephant (or some other), come to the waters, 

I went to the banks of the Sarayu bow in hand. Then hear* 
ing sounds from the water of a filling pitcher, I thought, — This 
must be an elephant. — I wounded it with a shaft. Next coming 
to the edge of the river, I saw an ascetic lying down on the 
ground almost deprived of life, with his heart pierced with 
an arrow. Then coming forward, I in accordance with the 
direction given by him as he lay in agony, suddenly extract- 
ed the arrow from his vitals. And as soon as the arrow had 
been extracted, he ascended heaven, O reverend sir, lamenting 
and bewailing you, both grown old. It is through ignorance 
that I suddenly wounded your son. This having been past, 
do you favor me with telling me what is now to be done, 
O ascetic.' Having heard these cruel words, the worshipful 
ascetic could well by his curse consume me to ashes. With 
eyes flooded with tears, and well nigh deprived of his senses 
by grief, that highly energetic one said unto me standing 
with joined hands, ‘If, O king, thou hadst not of thyself 
immediately communicated unto us this unpleasant news, thy 
head would have been reduced to a thousand flaws. Not to 
speak of Kshatriyas, I can even drag the very weilder of the 
thunderbolt himself from his position, if he knowingly kills 
one, in especial, that has assumed the VSnaprastha mode of 
life. Thy head would have been severed in seven, if thou 
hadst discharged the weapon knowingly at such an asectic 
staying in austerities and versed in the Vedas. It is because 
thou hast done this through ignorance that thou (still) livest, 
else the race itself of the Raghavas should be not, — and 
where art thou ?* He then said, ‘Do thou, O king, take us 
to the scene. To day will we look our last on our son 
besmeared with blood, his deer-skin garb falling off (from his 
body) 4 , lying senseless on the earth, and come under the 
subjection of the lord of righteousness.* Thereupon I alone 
taking them exceedingly disconsolate to the spot, made the 
ascetic and his wife touch their son. And having approached 
47 

Digitized by Google 




370 



RAM AY AN A. 



their son and touched him, those ascetics fell on his person, 
and then his father addressed him thus, ‘Thou salutest 
me not to-day, nor dost thou speak to me. Why, my child, 
dost thou lie down on the ground ? Art thou angry (with us)? 
If, my son, thou dost not feel kindly to me, do thou look up 
to thy virtuous mother. And why, O son, dost thou 
not embrace me ? Do , thou speak tender words. At the 
small hours, from whom engaged in study, shall 1 hear the 
scriptures sweetly read in a way coming home to the listneris 
mind ? Who, having performed his daily devotions and off* 
ered oblations unto the sacrificial fire, will bathe me, afflicted 
with grief for my son ? And who procuring Kandas, fruits 
and roots, will feed me like an welcome guest, incapable of 
doing anything and furnishing provisions, and without any 
one to take care of myself ? And, my son, how will I main* 
tain this blind ascetic mother of thine, proud of her son, 
who is passing her days in misery? Do thou stay, my 
son, in my behalf. Tomorrow thou wilt go to Yama's mansion 
with me and thy mother. Distressed with grief and rendered 
miserable in the forest, both of us deprived of thee shall soon 
repair to the abode of Yama. Seeing Vivaswata's son, I will 
say unto him, — Do thou, O lord of justice, forgive 
me, and let this my son continue to maintain us, his 
parents. It behoves thee, O righteous and illustrious guard* 
ian of the worlds, to confer on me reduced to such a pass 
this one enduring dakshind capable of removing our fear. — 
Thou, my son, art sinless, although slain by this one who has 
done an unrighteous act ; and by the force of this truth, do 
thou repair to the world of warriors. Do thou, O son, go 
the supreme way that is gone by heroes who without turning 
back from the fight, are slain in open encounter. Do thou, 
O son, go the way that has been gone by Sagara and Saivya 
and Dilipa and Janamejaya and Nahusa and Dhundum&ra. 
Do thou, O son, go the way that is gone by all creatures, even 
by ascetics engaged in the study of the Veda, by bestowers 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KA NDA M. 



37i 



of lands, by those performing fire-sacrifices, by individuals each 
devoted to a single wife, men giving away a thousand kine, 
persons tending their preceptors, and individuals renouncing 
lives by fasting. He that is born in such a race cannot 
come by any evil case. Such a condition be his that has 
taken the life of thee, my friend.’ 

"Having thus piteously wept, he along with his wife set 
about performing the watery rites on behalf of his son. There- 
upon speedily assuming a celestial shape, the virtuous son 
of the ascetic by his own actions ascended heaven in company 
with Sakra. Then (returning) along with Sakra, the ascetic 7 
comforting his aged parents, addressed them, saying, ( I have 
attained a high state in consequence of having served you. 
Do you also without delay come unto me.* Having said this, 
the ascetic’s son of restrained senses ascended heaven by 
means of an excellent and commodious car. Having perform- 
ed the watery rites, the highly energetic ascetic along 
with his wife speedily said unto me staying with joined 
hands, 'Do thou, O monarch, slay me on the instant. I do not 
grieve to die’ — thou hast by thy shaft rendered me who had 
an only son, absolutely sonless. Since this sorrow arising from 
the calamity that has befallen my son, is at present mine 
(through thy instrumentality), I curse thee, — thou shalt even 
in this way find thy death from grief for thy son. As thou 
a Kshatriya hast through ignorance slain an ascetic, the sin, 

0 lord of men, of slaying a Br&hmana will not envelope thee 
speedily ; but thou shalt shortly come by this dreadful and 
mortal condition, like a donor of Dakshin&s (coming by the 
things given away).’ Having thus inflicted on me the curse 
and piteously lamented long, the couple ascended the funer- 
al pile and went to heaven. O noble dame, the crime that 

1 hitting by help of sound, had committed in my boyhood, 
has reverted to my recollection in course of thought. And, 

O exalted lady, even as a disease generated by one’s taking 
rice with unhealthy curry, this danger is imminent in conse- 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




372 



RAMAVANA. 



quence of that act. 0 gentle one, the words of that noble- 
minded person are about to be verified in me.” Having said 
this and weeping, the king said to his wife, “I shall renounce 
life through grief for my son. And I shall no more behold thee 
with my eyes. Do thou, O Kau^alya, touch me. People 
going to the mansion of Yama no more behold (their friends). 
If R&ma touch me directly or otherwise, obtain the exche- 
quer, and be installed as the heir-apparent, meseems, I may 
yet live. O noble lady, what I have done unto RSghava is 
not surely like myself; but what (on the other hand) he has 
done by me is worthy of him. What sensible man forsaketh 
his son, albeit he may be wicked ? And what son being 
banished, does not bear ill will towards his father ? But I do 
not see thee with my eyes, and my memory fails. These 
envoys of Vivaswata's son, O Kau^alyS, urge speed upon me. 
What can be an object of greater regret than. that I during 
my last moments cannot behold the righteous R§ma having 
truth for prowess ? Even as the sun drieth up a drop of 
water, grief for not seeing my son of incomparable acts drieth 
my spirits. Those are not men — those are gods who in the 
fifteenth .year shall again behold Rama's countenance graced 
with elegent and burnished ear-rings. O thou of graceful 
eye-brows, blessed are they who shall behold RSma’s count- 
enance furnished with eyes resembling lotus-petals, with 
excellent teeth and a shapely nose, like unto the lord of the 
stars himself. .Blessed are they that shall behold that fragrant 
face of his Hke unto the autumnal moon, or the full-blown lotus. 
Thrice-blessed they who with delighted hearts, shall behold 
R&ma returned from the forest and come back to AyodhyS, 
like unto Sukra crowning the zenith ? O Kaucalyl, my heart 
is weighed down with grief ; and I do not perceive objects 
of hearing, feeling, or taste. My senses are growing dim in 
consequence of the mental stupor, like the rays of a lamp 
reduced to smoke, becoming dim when the oil has been ex- 
hausted. As the violence of a river wears away its banks, 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYA KAN DA M 



373 



my grief occasioned through my own agency is destroying me, 
who am helpless and insensible. 0 mighty-armed Raghava ! 
O thou remover of my troubles ! O thou that dost delight 
in thy father ! thou art my stay, O my son, that hast gone 
away. O KaucalyS, 1 do not see. O wretched SumitrS ! O 
cruel one, thou enemy of mine, thou Kaikeyi, who hast be- 
fouled thy line !” Having thus lamented in presence qf R&ma’s 
mother and Sumitri, king Da^aratha breathed his last. 

Thus that distressed lord of men, smitten with the exile 
of his beloved son, that one possessed of a gracious presence, 
when the night had been half spent, wrought up with the 
violence of his emotion, departed this life. 



SECTION LX V . 



When the night had gone away, on the morning of the 
next day, eulogists, accomplished bards, genealogists skilled 
in reciting, and singers versed in musical permutation, 
presenting themselves at the place of the sovereign, 
began to perform separately. And as they eulogized 
the monarch with benedictions loudly uttered, the palace 
resounded with the sounds of the eulogies. And as 
the bards hymned the monarch, palm-players celebrating 
the deeds of the kings of the Raghu race, began to play with 
their palms. And awakened by those sounds, birds on boughs 
and in cages worthy of the royal race, uttered notes. And 
the sacred words uttered by these), the notes of Vin&s , 
and the valedictory songs of singers filled that mansion. 
And as on former occasions, men practising purity and well up 
in serving, with numerous women and eunuchs entered 
appearance. Persons acquainted w^h the ceremonials con- 
nected with bath, according to the ordinance and in due time, 
in golden vessels brought water impregnated with Hair 



Digitized by 



Googl^ 




374 



RAM AY AN A. 



sandal powder. Pure females together with many virgins 
brought kine &c, which were to be touched, Ganges water for 
sipping, mirrors, cloths, ornaments and other articles. 
All the things that were procured (for presentation unto the 
monarch) were worshipped in accordance with prescription, 
were furnished with auspicious marks, and were of excellent 
virtues aqd possessed of auspiciousness. As long as the sun 
did not rise, all these people remained expecting the presence 
of the king ; but then they were alarmed as to what had 
occurred. 

Those ladies that were beside the bed of the lord of 
Ko^ala, were consoling their husband. And engaged in tend- 
ing the monarch with mild and pliant words, those females 
knowing the condition of sleep, feeling him as he lay in his 
bed, did not perceive any action in the ever-moving pulse. 
Thereupon apprehensive for the king's life, they began to 
tremble like a blade of grass on a torrent. Filled with doubts 
at sight of the king, the ladies at last concluded that what 
had been apprehended (by the monarch) had certainly taken 
place. Overcome by grief for their sons, Sumitrl and 
Kau£aly& were sleeping as if they were dead, and had 
not yet awaked. Deprived of lustre, pallid, stricken by 
sorrow, and lying with her limbs contracted, Kau9aly& looked 
like a star enveloped in darkness. And after Kau9aly&, the 
king, and after him, SumitrS. ; and with her countenance 
faded from grief, this noble lady did not look particularly 
lovely. Finding these two ladies asleep and the king seem- 
ing as if sleeping, the inmates of the inner apartment 
showed themselves as if their lives had departed out of 
them. Thereupon exceedingly distressed, those paragons 
of their sex, like she-elephants in the forest deprived of their 
leader of the herd, broke out into wailing. At the sounds 
* of their lamentations, bpth KaugalySL and SumitrS, suddenly 
regaining consciousness, awoke from their sleep. And 
Kau9alyft and Sumitrft looking at the king and feeling him. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYAKANDAM. 



375 



felt down to the earth, exclaiming, “Ah lord.” As the 
daughter of Ko^ala’s lord rolled on the ground, she 
covered with dust did not appear in all her loveliness, like 
a star fallen from the sky to the earth below. And when 
the king had departed this life, the women saw Kau£aly£ 
fallen on the earth like the slain mate of an elephant. Then 
all the wives of the monarch headed by Kaikeyi, burning 
with grief and weeping, were well nigh rendered senseless. 
And the loud sounds emitted by these, mingling with those 
(who had Sbeen lamenting before them), attained greater 
proportions and filled the hall. And the mansion of the king 
became filled with people exceedingly excited and fright- 
ened, eager to know all about the matter, — became filled with 
lamentations, with friends afflicted with distress, its joy 
instantaneously vanished — a scene of distress and dole. 
Knowing that the lord of earth had departed, his wives sur- 
rounding that illustrious one, smitten with excess of sorrow 
and weeping bitterly and piteously, holding the king's hands 
indulged in lamentations, like forlorn ones. 



8ECTION LXVI, 



Seeing the king had ascended heaven., like unto a fire 
that has cooled, or an ocean deprived of its waters, or the 
sun shorn of his splendour, Kau£aly& afflicted with woe, 
taking on her lap the head of the king, with tears in her 
eyes, said, “O Kaikeyi, attain thou thy wishes : do thou 
enjoy this kingdom rid of thy thorn. O cruel one, O thou 
of wicked ways, thou that forsaking the king had set thy 
heart (on having thy son crowned), R§ma had gone away, 
forsaking me ; and now my lord has ascended heaven. I can 
no longer bear to live, like one left lone in a wilderness by 
her companions. What other woman except Kaikeyi lost 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




37 $ 



RAM AY AN A. 



to righteousness, having lost her deity, her lord, wishes 
to carry on existence in another’s kingdom ? As a covetuous 
person taking poison (through anger or some other passion), 
does not consider himself guilty, (so Kaikeyi) having done 
this evil through MantharSl’s incitement, does not bring her 
guilt home to her mind. It is through the instrumentality of 
the hump-backed woman that this race of the Raghavas has 
been destroyed by Kaikeyi. Hearing that the king being 
made to do an unrighteous action, has banished R£ma 
together with his wife, king Janaka will be filled with grief 
as I have been. That virtuous one does not know that to-day 
I have become helpless and been widowed. Rama of eyes 
resembling lotus-petals has living been removed from 
my sight. The fair daughter of Videha’s king unworthy of 
hardship, in ascetic guise is leading a life of trouble and 
terror in the woods. Hearing at night the dreadful roars 
of birds and beasts crying, she exceedingly frightened takes 
shelter with R&ghava. Old and, having an only daughter, 
he revolving in his mind thoughts of Vaidehi, shall, smitten 
with grief, surely renounce his life. I ever faithful to my 
lord will die this very day, embracing this body ; I will enter 
fire*” As embracing the (dead) body, that unfortunate 
lady was bewailing, the courtiers had the distressed (queen) 
removed from there. Then placing the corpse of the king 
in a (capacious) pan with oil, the courtiers performed the 
mourning rites of the monarch. But well versed in every 
thing, the counsellors, in the absence of his son, did not 
perform the funeral obsequies of the king ; and therefore 
they placed his body stretched in the pan of oil. Alas ! 
at length concluding it for certain that the king was 
dead, the ladies burst out into lamentations. And raising 
their arms, with tears trickling down their faces, they in 
dire affliction and extremely exercised with grief, lamented, 
“O monarch, why do you forsake us, who have been already 
deprived of R2ma ever speaking fair and firm in promise ? 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHY A KA NDA M. 



377 



Renounced by Rama, how shall we, rendered widows, stay 
with the wicked Kaikeyi, co-wife with us ? That one of free 
soul is our master, as he is the lord of yourself. R&ma has 
gone to the woods, forsaking regal dignity. Deprived of 
you as well as that hero, and overwhelmed with misfortune, 
how shall we live, reprimanded by Kaikeyi ? She that has 
renounced the king, R&ma, and Lakshmana along with Sita — 
whom can such a one not renounce ?” Thus with tears in 
their eyes, the wives of that descendant of Raghu, joyless 
and convulsed with a huge passion, displayed signs of sorrow. 
Like a night without stars, like a fair one forsaken by her 
husband, the city of AyodhySL without the magnanimous 
monarch did not appear delightful as it had done before, 
with the populace filled with tears, the ladies uttering excla-* 
mations of distress, and the terraces and courts deserted. 
On the lord of men having ascended heaven from grief, and 
the wives of the king remaining on the earth, the sun, his 
journey done, set, and the night began her course. The 
idea of consuming the king's corpse in the absence of his 
son did not recommend itself to the assembled adherents (of 
the departed). Thinking this, they in that way laid the 
king endowed with an inconceivably dignified presence. And 
with her terraces overflowing with tears that flooded the 
throats of the mourners, the city appeared like the welkin 
without its splendour in the absence of the sun, or the night 
with the stars enveloped. And on the demise of that illus- 
trious personage, in the city men and women in multitudes, 
censuring Bharata’s mother, became extremely distressed, 
and did not attain peace of mind. 



48 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




RAM AY AN A. 



37 ® 

SECTION LXVII. 

_A_T length the weary night 5n Ayodhyl rendered 
cheerless by lamentations, and populous with men with voice 
choked with tears, was spent. And when the night had 
departed and the sun had arisen, those officers of the royal 
house-hold belonging to the twice-born order, Mirkandeya, 
Maudgalya, V&madeva, KS^yapa, KatySyana, Gautama, and 
the highly famous J3v31i. assembled together along with 
the counsellors, spoke each on different topics. Then facing 
the royal priest, the eminent Vasistha, they said, “That night 
that had appeared like unto an hundred years has at last been 
painfully passed. The king racked by sorrow for his son having 
breathed his last, the mighty monarch has ascended heaven, 
RSma has taken refuge in the woods, the energetic Lakshmana 
has gone with R&ma, and both Bharata and Satrughna— 
repressors of foes — are staying in Kekaya in pleasant Raja - 
griha , the abode of their maternal grandfather. Do you select 
some one this very day from the descendants of Ikshw&ku, to 
be king here. Verily doth a kingdom go to ruin, when with- 
out a king. He that goes garlanded with lightning, and has a 
mighty voice, even the Cloud— doth not with skyey shower 
drench the Earth in a kingdom without a king. In a kingless 
kingdom no one sows corn. In a kingless kingdom the son does 
not obey his sire, or the wife her husband. A kingless king- 
dom possesses no wealth, and wives are hard to keep in such a 
'place. This great fear attends a kingless country. And 
where is other morality (besides that detailed above) to be 
found at such a place ? In a kingless country men do not 
form themselves into associations, nor do they, inspired with 
cheerfulness, make elegant gardens or sacred edifices. In a 
kingless country, the twice-born ones do not celebrate sacri- 
fices. In a kingless country, in mighty sacrifices wealthy 
Br&hmanas do not confer (on the officiating priests) the 



Digitized by Google 




A YODHYAKANDAM. 



m 



dakskinds (which they receive according to the ordinance). 
In a kingless country, neither social gatherings, nor festivities 
characterised by the presence of merry theatrical managers 
and performers, increase. In a kingless country disputants 
cannot decide their point ; nor are persons given to hearing 
Purlin ic recitations pleased by those delighting in the 
practice. In a kingless country, bevies of virgins decked in 
gold do not repair to gardens for purposes of sport. In a 
kingless country, the wealthy are not well protected ; nor do 
shepherds and cultivators sleep with their doors open. In a 
kingless country pleasure-seeking people do not in company 
with females go to the woods by means of swift vehicles. 
In a kingless country long-tusked elephants sixty years 
old, bearing bells on their necks, do not walk the high- 
way. In a kingless country one hears not the clappings 
of persons engaged in shooting arrows constantly. In 
a kingless country traders coming from distant lands, 
loaded with various kinds of merchandise, do not with 
safety go along the roads. In a kingless country the ascetic 
with his subdued senses, himself his sole protector, who 
makes his quarters wherever evening overtakes him, cannot 
walk contemplating the Deity. In a kingless country, one 
cannot protect what one has, or procure what one has not. 
In a kingless country, the forces cannot bear the onslaught 
of the foe. In a kingless country men cannot at will 
go on excellent and high-mettled horses and ornamented 
cars. In a kingless country persons well versed in learning 
can not engage in controversy, repairing to woods and groves. 
In a kingless country, persons with intent hearts do not 
offer garlands, sweets, and Dakshin£s, for worshipping the 
gods. In a kingless country, princes smeared with sandal 
and aguru , do not look graceful like trees in spring. Even as 
a river without water, a wood without grass, a herd of kine 
without a keeper, is a kingdom without a king. The sign 
of a car is its pennon, of fire is smoke, ' and our banner 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




380 



RAM AY AN A. 



the king, has gone to heaven. In a kingless country a 
person hardly preserves his life ; and like fishes people eat 
up one another. Even those heretics who having disregarded 
the dignity of social morality had met with chastisement at 
the hands of the king, their fear removed— give themselves 
airs. As the sight is engaged in the welfare of the body, 
the king — that fountain of truth and religion — is engaged 
in compassing the good of the kingdom. The king is truth, 
the king is morality, the king is the racial dignity of those 
possessed of the same, the king is the father, the king is the 
mother— the king compasseth the welfare of men. By virtue 
of magnanimity of character, a king surpasses Yama and Vai- 
$ravana and Sakra and Varuna endowed with mighty strength. 
If there were not a king in this world to adjudge fair 
and foul, darkness would overspread (the face of the earth) 
and people could not distinguish anything whatever. As the 
ocean keepeth within its continent, we even while the 
monarch lived, did not disregard your words. Do you, O 
best of Br&hmanas, beholding our acts rendered nugatory, 
and this empire become a wilderness for want of a king, 
install that descendant of Ikshw&ku or any other as king of 
this realm.” 



8ECTION LXVIII. 



Hearing their words, Vasishtha said unto the Br&hmanas 
and the adherents and counsellors (of the king), “Bharata, on 
whom the king has conferred the kingdom, along with his 
brother Satrughna, is living happily in the house of his 
maternal uncle. Let envoys by means of fleet coursers 
speedily repair thither and bring those heroic brothers. What 
shall we decide ?” “Let them go” — said all unto Vasishtha. 
Hearing their words, Vasishtha spake unto them, saying,— 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




JLFODHVA KA NDA M. 



38 



“Come here, thou Siddh§rtha, and Vijaya, and Jayanta, 
and A 9 okanandana. Do ye hear. I will tell you what ye 
are to do. First going speedily to the royal residence by 
means of swift houses, do you, renouncing grief, by my order 
speak these words of mine unto Bharata, ‘The priest as well 
as the counsellors have enquired after your welfare. Do you 
at once set out. A business is at hand that brooketh no 
delay on your part.’ But ye must on no account commu- 
nicate unto him the exile of Rlma, or the demise of the 
monarch, or the destruction that hath befallen the Raghu race 
through this occasion. Do ye, speedily taking silk apparel 
and excellent ornaments for king Bharata, set off.” There- 
upon, having been furnished with the necessaries for the 
journey, they bound for Kekaya went to their respective 
abodes, mounted on goodly horses. Then having supplied 
themselves with the necessaries of the journey, the envoys in 
consonance with Vasistha's injunction, speedily went away. 
Having proceeded by the west of Aparatlla, they in the middle 
crossed the MSlini, and went towards the north of Pralamva. 
Then crossing the Gang2 at H&stinapura, and arriving at 
P&nch&la, they proceeded west ward through Kuruj&ngala. 
And beholding wktery expanses filled with blown blossoms, 
and rivers containing pellucid waters, the envoys proceeded 
apace on account of the errand they had on hand. And 
they darted past the Saradanda overflowing with delight- 
ful water, beautiful, and haunted by fowls of various kinds. 
Then on the western bank of the stream, coming upon a 
tree called Satyapay&chana presided by a deity, and 
bowing down unto the tree and going round it, they 
entered the city of Kulinga. And having passed Teyobi- 
bhabana and arrived at Abhik&la, they crossed the 
sacred stream Ikshumati belonging to the Ikshw&kus for 
generations. Beholding here Br&hmanas versed in the 
Vedas drinking water with their joined hands, they went 
through VShllika towards the mount Sud&m&n. There seeing 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




RAM AY AN A. 



38 * 

the foot-print of Vishnu, they, desirous of doing the bidding 
of their master, proceeded a long way, viewing the Vip^SL 
and the Salmali and rivers and tanks and pools and ponds 
and sheets of water and various kinds of lions and tigers 
and deer and elephants. And with their vehicles fatigued, the 
ambassadors, on account of the great distance of the way, 
speedily reached that best of cities, Girivraja. And for 
pleasing their master, for the preservation of the people, and 
enabling Bharata to assume the reins of government, those 
envoys, casting aside negligence, swiftly entered the city in 
the night. 



SECTION L X I X . 



The very same night that the envoys entered the city, 
Bharata saw an evil dream. And seeing that evil dream 
during the short hours, the son of that king of kings exceed- 
ingly burned in grief. And finding him aggrieved, his sweet, 
speeched associates, endeavouring to chase the heaviness, 
began to converse on a variety of subjects. Some played 
on instruments ; some for the purpose of pacifying his mind, 
danced (the courtezans) ; others performed scenes variously 
fraught with the sentiment of mirth. But although his 
friends intending to allay his agitation set about enacting 
passages calculated to amuse family circles, that magnani- 
mous descendant of Raghu did not indulge in laughter. 
Then a dear friend addressed Bharata, as he sat surrounded 
by his friends, “Surrounded by your friends, why do you 
not, my friend, join in the mirth ?” Thus asked by his friend, 
Bharata answered, “Listen why this depression has overtaken 
me. In a dream I beheld my father, pale, with his hair loosely 
flowing about, plunging from the summit of a mountain 
into a dirty pool filled with cow-dung. And I saw him 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YODHYAKANDAM. 



383 



floating on a sink of cow-dung, and yet with a momentary 
laugh drinking oil by means of his joined hands. Then 
feeding on rice raized with sessame, he again and again 
hanging his head down, dives into oil with his limbs rubbed 
with oil. And in my dream I saw the ocean dried up, and 
the moon fallen on the earth, and the earth as if invaded 
by enfolding darkness, and the tusk of the elephant on which 
the monarch rides falling in fragments, and flaming fire 
suddenly extinguished, and the earth rent, and the trees 
withered, and all the mountains befching smoke. . And 
I saw the king seated on a sable seat of iron, clad in a sable 
garb ; and women black and yellow beating him. And 
bearing a garland of red flowers, with his body daubed with 
red sandal, he was fast proceeding to the south in a car 
yoked with asses. And women clad in red garment were 
laughing at him, and a grim-visaged R&kshasa was seen by 
me as dragging him. This was the dream that I saw this 
terrible night. Either I, or Rlma, or the king, or Lakshmana 
is to breathe our last The smoke of the funeral pyre of 
him will be shortly visible that goes in the car yoked with 
asses. It is for this reason that I am poor of spirit, and 
that I do not respond to your words. Further, my throat 
is parched, and my mind ill at ease. Ground of fear find I 
none, yet am I subject to fear. My voice is untuned, and 
my grace fled, and I begin to despise my life, nor know I the 
reason why. Bringing to mind this various-looking dream 
which I had not thought of before, and remembering the 
king of incomprehensible presence, this fear goeth not from 
my heart.” 




w — 



384 



RAMAYANA . 



SECTION LXX. 



J3harata was speaking thus when the envoys with their 
vehicles fatigued, entered the splendid royal residence sur- 
rounded by a strong rampart. Presenting themselves before 
the king, they, well received by him as well as the prinqe, 
bowed down unto the feet of the monarch. Then they 
addressed Bharata, saying, — “The priest and the counsellors 
have enquired after* your welfare. Do you set out speedily. 
A business is on hand that brooketh no delay on your part. 
And, O you of expansive eyes, do you take these costly 
raiments and ornaments, and present them unto your mater- 
nal uncle and grand-father. Twenty Kotis are intended 
for the king and complete ten for your maternal uncle, O son 
of the monarch.” Taking all these, Bharata attached to his 
relatives, made the articles over unto them ; and receiving 
the envoys with goodly gifts, spoke unto them, “Is my 
father, king Da^aratha, well? And is it well with R£ma 
and the high-souled Lakshmana? And is the mother 
of the intelligent Rlma, the revered Kau£aly&, convers- 
ant with virtue and ever practising it, well ? Is the virtu- 
ous Sumitril — mother of Lakshmana and of the heroic 
Satrughna — well ? And that wrathful one ever intent 

on her interest and setting immense store by her wis- 
dom, my mother Kaikeyi — is it also well with her ?” Thus 
addressed by the magnanimous Bharata, the envoys spoke 
unto him these humble and brief words, “Those of 
whose welfare you are enquiring after, are, O foremost of 
men, all well. Sree seated on the lotus asks for you. 
Let your car be yoked.” Thus addressed, Bharata said unto 
the envoys, “Let me tell the king that the envoys are urging 
speed on me.” Having said this, that son of the king, 
Bharata, communicated unto his maternal grand-father what 
the envoys had told him. “Asked by the envoys, I shall, O 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYA KA NDA M . 



385 

monarch, go to my father. I shall come again whenever 
you will remember me." Thus accosted by Bharata, his 
maternal grand-father, the king, smelling Bharata's head, 
spoke these auspicious words unto that descendant of 
Raghu, “Go, my child ; I permit thee. Kaikeyi is mother 
of a worthy son through thee. Do thou, O subduer of foes, 
communicate our welfare unto both thy father and thy 
mother. Do thou likewise communicate the same unto the 
priest and the other principal Br&hmanas ; as also, my child, 
unto those mighty bowmen, the brothers RSma and Laksh- 
mana " Then honoring Bharata, king Kekaya conferred 
on Bharata wealth consisting of choice elephants main- 
tained (at the palace) and woolen sheets and deerskins. 
And the king presented him with dogs brought up 
in the inner apartment, resembling tigers in strength and 
prowess, furnished with teeth representing weapons, and 
large of body. And honoring the son of Kaikeyi, Kekaya 
gave him two thousand ntshkas and six hundred horses. 
And for following Bharata, A9wapati without delay 
assigned a number of goodly, trustworthy, and quali- 
fied courtiers. And Bharata's maternal uncle conferred 
on Bharata wealth in the shape of graceful elephants sprung 
in the Ir&vat mountain and the country called Indra^rS ; as 
well as fleet and well-broken horses. But owing to the 
hurry of his departure, Bharata the son of Kaikeyi did not 
appear to be so very much gratified with the gifts . Owing to 
his having seen the dream and the post haste speed of the 
envoys, a mighty anxiety was present in his heart. Then 
issuing from his abode, that one possessed of exceeding grace 
passed the goodly thoroughfare thronged with men, horses, 
and elephants. Having left it behind, Bharata saw (before 
him) the inner apartment (of the king) ; and thereupon the 
handsome Bharata entered it without let. Then after 
speaking with his maternal grandfather and uncle, Yudhijit, 
Bharata ascending a car, set out with Satrughna. Thereat 
49 



Digitized by t^ooQle 



386 



RAMA FAN A. 



servants by means of an hundred cars, furnished with 
circular wheels, and yoked with camels, oxen, horses, and 
asses, followed Bharata. Protected by the forces and the 
courtiers of his material grandfather dear unto him like 
his ownself, the magnanimous Bharata who had his foes 
removed, taking with him his brother, Satrughna, departed 
from the abode (of the king), like a Siddha issuing from 
the regions of Indra. 



SECTION LX XI . 



Issuing from the palace, the blazing Bharata endowed 
with prowess went in an easterly direction, and seeing before 
him the river called Sudama, crossed it. Then the auspicious 
descendant of Ikshw r £ku crossed the broad Hr&dini coursing 
westwards, as also the river Satadru. Then crossing a river 
at Eladhana,* and coming to Aparaparvata,t he crossed the 
Silaj and the Akurvati, and arrived at Agneya$ and Salyakar- 
shanam. And having purified himself and seen Siiavaha||, 
that one of truthful purposes passed the Mah&cailas,^ and 
entered the forest of Chaitraratha. Then coming upon the 
confluence of the Ganga and the Saraswati, Bharata entered 
the forest of Varundalying to the north** of Viramatsya. Next 

* Some read Eladh&ni. — T. 

t Some read Apharaparyat&. 

X The river, according to some, is so named because it transforms the 
surrounding objects to stone. — T. 

$ Some make Agneya an epithet to Salyakarshaoa, meaning, relating to 
the south-east. — T. 

II According to Tirtha, SilAvahA is a stream having Agneya on one side 
and Salyakarshana on the other. — T. 

IT Lit., mighty mountains. — T. 

Uttar amt , lit. north. Some texts read uttardn. It would mean countries 
lying to the north of Viramatsya. — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 





A YODHYA KAN DA M 



387 



crossing the rdpid fiver KulingA and the HrAdini surrounded 
by hills, as Well as the Yamunl, he ordered the forces to* 
halt. Then cooling the limbs of the fatigued horses (with 
water) and refreshing them, Bharata himself bathed there and 
drank of the Water ; and then resumed the march, furnished 
with the water. Then the gentle prince by means of an 
excellent car, like unto the wind-god himself, entered the 
mighty forest inhabited by various races of men. Seeing 
that the mighty river Gang* was hard to cross at An^udhAna, 
Bharata speedily went to the famous city of PrAgvata. And 
having crossed the GangA at PrAgvata, he went over to the . 
KutikoshtikA. Having with his forces crossed that river,, 
he proceeded to Dharmavarddhana. Then proceeding by 
the south of Torana, he came to Jamvuprastha. Then* 
Da^aratha's son went to the beautiful village of Varutha* 
Having for a while stayed at that romantic wood* he proceed- 
ed eastwards, and presented himself at the villa of 
UjjihAyana, where abound trees (called) Priyaka. Coming to 
the Priyakas, Bharata speedily yoking the horses, set out 
without delay, issuing his orders to the forces. Then sojourn- 
ing at Sarvatirtha and crossing the river there flowing north- 
wards as well as others abounding in various kinds of 
mountainous horses, Bharata arrived at Hastiprishthaka. 
And at Lohitya that foremost of men crossed the Kapivati, 
at Ekasala, the SthAnumati, and at Vinaya, the Gomati. And 
Bharata arriving at a forest of Sala trees in the city of 
Kalinga, speedily passed it with his forces way-worn. And 
having passed the forest swiftly over night, he at sunrise 
saw AyodhyA built by king Manu. Having spent seven 
nights on the journey, that chief of men beheld AyodhyA 
before him and thus addressed the charioteer, “O charioteer, 
from the distance AyodhyA seemeth like a mass of black 
earth, albeit she boasts of sacrificial priests crowned with every 
virtue, BrAhmanas versed in the Vedas and opulent people, 
and albeit she is maintained by RAjarshis. Formerly one could 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




3*8 



Ramayana . 



hear a great and mighty tumult all round AyodhyS proceeding 
from men and women ; but I do not hear this to-day. The 
gardens wherefrom persons having sported in the evening 
used to rush out (at day break) wear a different aspect now. 
Forsaken by the pleasure-seekers, the gardens appear to 
weep. And, O charioteer, the city appears to me like a 
wilderness. And I do not as formerly behold the flower of 
the city leaving or entering her on cars or elephants or 
horses. Gardens which, frequented by people inebriated 
with the honey of love, met together for purposes of sport, 
looked charmingly blooming, I find as utterly void of cheer- 
fulness, with the trees as if lamenting with tremulous leaves. 
Still do I not hear the inarticulate though sweet and delicious 
voice of beasts and birds crying in chorus* Why, as before, 
doth not the blamelesst and bland wind blow mixed with (the 
perfume of sandal and faint with dhupa ? And why, again, 
have the sounds of VinSs and Mridangas developed by beating 
sticks, which continually flew in a never-ceasing vigorous 
course, ceased to-day ? And I witness various evil, unsightly, 
and unpleasant^ omens, and hence my mind is depressed. O 
charioteer, complete good fortune with my friends is hardly 
to be realised. But although no apparent cause exists for 
my depression of spirits, yet my heart droopeth.” Then 
Bharata depressed and cast down and with his senses afflicted, 
speedily entered the city ruled by IkshwSku. And Bharata 
having his vehicles fatigued, entered by the Vaijayanta$ gate, 
and went on, followed by the gate-keepers, who enquired 
after his welfare. Then courteously telling the warders to 
desist, he with an agitated heart spoke unto the tired chariot- 



* Some texts read muhus — momentarily, 
f Some texts read atula in place of amala,— incomparable. 
t The commentator renders amognani , inauspicious. I venture to differ 
from him. — T. 

$ Vaijayantena. Another meaning is. By the gate resembling that of lndrm'% 
palace. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





A YODHVA KA NDA M. 



389 



eer of A^wapati, “0 sinless one, why have I been brought 
in this haste without any (adequate) reason ? My heart 
apprehendeth some evil ; and my disposition gives way. O 
charioteer, I see around me all those signs which I had heard 
told as occurring on the occasion of the deaths of monarchs. 
I behold the houses of the citizens unswept and unsightly 
with the doors flung open, — and destitute of grace, without 
sacrifices and other religious ceremonies, without the incense 
of dhupa , the citizens fasting, and the people appearing 
with faded countenances, displaying no flags, etc., The abodes 
of the deities are not decorated with garlands, and their 
courts are unclean ; and remaining vacant, they look no longer 
beautiful as formerly. And the images are not worshipped ; 
and the places of sacrifice are in a like condition. And 
garlands are not displayed in the shops where they are sold. 
And traders looking anxious, with their business stopped, 
do not look as before. And in temples and Chaityas birds 
and beasts appear dispirited. And in the city I behold men 
and women pale and woe-begone and emaciated and anxious, 
with tears filling their eyes.” Having said this unto the 
charioteer, Bharata, beholding these inauspicious sights, 
entered the palace of the king with a depressed heart. 
Beholding the city resembling the city of Indra, with her 
crossings and houses and roads void of people, and the 
doors and hinges covered with dust, Bharata was filled with 
greater grief. And witnessing many unpleasant things 
which he had never seen during the life of the monarch, that 
high-souled one entered the mansion of his father, bending 
his head, depressed in spirits, and with his mind extremely 
aggrieved. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




39 ° 



RAM AY AN A. 



SECTION LXXI I. 

JS"ot having seen his father in his father’s quarters,* 
Bharata went to his mother’s apartment for seeing her. On 
seeing her son before her after his sojourn from home, 
Kaikeyi delighted, rose up from her golden seat. On entering 
his own quarter which he found deprived of grace, the vir- 
tuous Bharata took hold of his mother’s auspicious feet. Then 
smelling the crown of his head and embracing him and taking 
that illustrious one on her lap, Kaikeyi addressed him, 
saying, “How many days hence did you leave the residence 
of the revered one ? Hast thou felt any fatigue on the way 
incident to the car proceeding swiftly ? And is the revered 
one well, and thy maternal uncle, Yudhajit? And, my son, 
hast thou passed thy time pleasantly during thy sojourn ? 
It behoves thee to tell me all this.” Thus asked, that son 
of the king, Bharata, furnished with eyes resembling lotuses, 
told his mother that all was well. “Seven nights hence I 
took leave of that revered one’s residence. My mother's 
sire is well, as also my maternal uncle, Yudh&jit. My vehicles 
had got tired in consequence of bearing the wealth and 
jewels which that subduer of foes, the king, had bestowed on 
me. And it is for this reason that I have come in advance 
of them. Urged by the royal emissaries, I have come here 
so swiftly. But it behoves my mother to tell me what I 
wish to ask. This sleeping bedstead of yours adorned with 
gold is empty. 1 do not see the race of Ikshw&ku in their 
usual good spirits. The king generally remains in this apart- 
ment of my mother. But coming here with the desire of 

• The text is evidently corrupt. From the sequel it appears that Bharata had 
not seen the king at that time. The commentator, however, passes over the 
point in silence, which is to be accounted for by the slovenliness of the way 
of thought characterizing the Sanskrit commentators in general. An English 
commentator would have considered the matter as of very great importance, 
but his Hindu brother takes it quietly, and passes on with indifference.— 7*. 



Digitized by L^ooQle 





A YODHY A KA NDA M. 



35 * 



seeing him, I do not today find him at this place. I would 
take the feet of my father. Do you tell me who ask you. 
Is he in the apartment of my eldest mother, Kau^alyi ?” 
Blinded by the lust of dominion, and looking upon that as 
desirable (unto Bharata) which was exceedingly disagreeable 
(to him), Kaikeyi replied unto him, who did not know what 
had transpired, “That high-souled and energetic one ever 
engaged in sacrifice — the refuge of the good — thy father, the 
king, has come by the state which pertains to all creatures.” 
Hearing these words, Bharata of pure ways sprung from a 
righteous race, smit with the vehemence of sorrow on account 
of his father, suddenly fell down to the earth. And exclaiming 
in the anguish of spirit and in the excess of grief, the words, 
“Ah me ! Iam undone !” that mighty-armed one endowed with 
prowess, fell down, tossing about his arms. Then, overwhelm- 
ed with sorrow and distressed at the death of his father, 
that highly energetic one, with his senses distracted, indulged 
in lamentations, “This bed of my father used to look, like 
the speckless welkin at night crowned with the moon, after 
the clouds have gone off. But to-day, deprived of that 
intelligent one, it ceases to shine, like the firmament without 
the moon or the sea devoid of its waters.” Exclaiming 
with tears trickling down, that foremost of victorious ones, 
extremely afflicted at heart, wept, muffling his graceful 
countenance. Seeing that one resembling a celestial fallen 
to the earth, striken with sorrow, like unto a bough of the 
SSla that had been severed in the wood by an axe, his 
mother raising up his distressed son like a mad elephant or 
the sun or the moon, addressed him, “Arise, arise. Why dost 
thou lie down, O illustrious son of the king? Persons like 
thee having their senses under perfect control, and approved 
by men of culture, do not grieve. O thou endowed with 
understanding, like the halo of the Sun in the solar disc, 
thy sense, entitled to dispensing gifts and celebrating 
sacrifices, ever follows morals, the Sruii, and asceticism.” 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




39 2 



RAMAYANA . 



Having wept for a long while with his body rolling on the 
earth, Bharata. afflicted with manifold grief, answered his 
mother, saying, “ The king will install R£ma and celebrate a 
sacrifice’ concluding this for certain, I had joyfully gone from 
hence. But it has fallen out otherwise. That I do not behold 
my father ever engaged in the dear welfare (of his subjects) 
cleaves my heart, mother. Of what ailment hath the king 
breathed his last during my absence ? Blessed are R£ma 
and others who have personally performed my sire’s last rites. 
Surely the renowned monarch doth not know that I have 
come. (If he had done so), pressing down my head, my 
father would at once have smelt it. Where is now the 
soft hand of that energetic one which used to rub my person 
when it was covered with dust? Do you now without 
delay convey the news of my arrival unto the vigorous 
Rama, who is at once my father, brother and friend, and 
whose beloved servant I am. The eldest brother of one that 
is noble and cognisant of morality, becomes his father. 
I shall take hold of his feet : he is now my refuge. And, O 
noble lady, what did that virtuous one cognizant of virtue, 
that pre-eminently pious one, firm in his vow, and having 
truth for prowess — even my father, say ? I wish to hear news 
concerning us relative to the last moments of the monarch." 
Thus asked, Kaikeyi related all as it had happened, saying, 
"Bewailing ‘Ah R&ma !’ ‘Ah Site !’ ‘Ah Lakshmana!' that 
magnanimous one, the foremost of those that have attained 
to excellent state (after death), has gone to the next world 
coming under the law of time. Thy father like a mighty 
elephant fast bound with a cord, said unto me these words 
during his last moments, — ‘Blessed are they that shall see 
Rama and the mighty-armed Lakshmana returned along with 
Site.’" Hearing this, Bharata apprehending a second misfor- 
tune was deeply moved ; and with a sad countenance, he 
again asked his mother, "Where hath gone that righteous- 
souled one, the enchancer of Kau^alyi’s joy, along with 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A YKJDHYAKA NDA M. 



393 



Lakshmana and Sit§ ?'* T4ius : questioned, his mother at the 
same time duly said in wo r4s„ which although highly unwel- 
come, she took as agreeable to Bharata, “O son, that son of the 
king wearing bark has repaired Ux the forest of Dandaka, 
along with Vaidehi and fQllowed by Llkshmana.” Hear- 
ing this, Bharata apprehending some > moral lapse on the 
part of his brother from the dignity of his race, asked in 
agitation, “Has Rlma deprived any Br&hmana of his wealth ? 
Or has he wronged any innocent person, whether rich or 
poor? Has the fancy of the prince gone after the wife of 
another? For what reason hath brother R£ma been 
banished ?” Thereat his volatile mother, influenced by her 
feminine nature, related faithfully unto him her own doings. 
Thus asked by the magnanimous Bharata, Kaikeyi vainly 
pluming herself on her wisdom, joyfully said, “R5ma 
has deprived no BrShmana of his property, nor hath any 
innocent person rich or otherwise been wronged by him, — 
nor doth he ever with his eyes look at the wife of another. 
O son, as soon as I heard of R&ma’s (coming) installa- 
tion, I asked for the kingdom to be conferred on thee, 
and R£ma to be banished. Thereupon, he, staying by his 
promise, did accordingly : R&ma hath been banished along 
with Sumitr&’s son and Sita.' Not seeing his beloved son, 
the illustrious h>rd of earth, stricken by grief on his account, 
has breathed his last. Do thou now, O thou cognizant of 
duty, take charge of the kingdom. I have done all this in 
thy interests. Do not give way to sorrow. O son, assume 
patience. This city is subject to thee, as well as this 
peaceful kingdom. Having with the help of the principal 
Brihmanas headed by Vasishtha, duly performed the funeral 
obsequies of the king, do thou, without suffering thy energy 
to depart, install thyself in the kingdom." , r 

i 



5° 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




394 



RAM AY AN A. 



8ECTION LXXIII. 



Hearing of his father's death and the exile of his 
brothers, Bharata burning in grief, said these words, “Depriv- 
ed of my father as weH as my brother like unto a father, 
what shall I bewailing them and undone by thee do with the 
kingdom ? Thou, like one throwing alkali on a sore, hast, 
by bringing about the death of the king and making Rlma 
an ascetic, heaped grief on grief. Thou hast come like 
the fatal night for the destruction of this race. Not under- 
standing it, my father embraced live coal. O thou that hast 
thy gaze fixed on sin, it is through thee that my sovereign 
has come by death ; and that, O stainer of the line^ this race 
has by thy infatuation been deprived of its happiness. Hav- 
ing got thee, my illustrious sire intent upon truth, king 
Da 9 aratha, afflicted by extreme sorrow, has departed this 
life. Why hath the king, my father, ever loving virtue, been 
deprived of life ? Why hath R&ma been banished ; and 
wherefore hath he gone to the woods ? Afflicted with grief 
for their son, even if Kau9aly2 and Sumitr& live, it will be 
hard for them to do so in the presence of thee, my mother. 
Surely the noble and virtuous R3ma, well knowing his duties 
towards his superiors, regards thee as highly as he doth his 
own mother. In the same way, my eldest mother, the 
far-sighted Kau9aly5, doing her duties by thee, bears 
herself like a sister. Why, O sinful one, having sent 
to the woods her magnanimous son, clad in bark, dost 
* thou not grieve ? Having exiled the famous and heroic 
R&ma seeing no sin, clad in bark, what benefit dost 
thou perceive as thine ? I deem that thou didst not know 
how very highly I regarded R&ghava ; and therefore it is 
that thou hast brought this mighty calamity. Not seeing 
those chiefs of men, R&ma and Lakshmana, by virtue of 
whose energy can I venture to rule the kingdom ? The 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHY A KA NDA M. 



395 



monarch was ever protected by that powerful one possessed 
of mighty energy, as Meru is protected by its forest. Like a 
calf burdened with a load capable of being borne by a 
mighty ox, by what energy shall I bear this burthen which was 
borne by. an exceedingly strong person ? And even if this 
strength be mine through yoga or vigor of intellect, I will 
not crown with success the hopes of thee, proud of thy son. 
Nor, had R&ma not always regarded thee as his mother, 
would I hesitate to renounce thee, whose heart hath been 
set on sin. O thou that viewest unrighteousness, O thou 
that hast fallen off from the way of the good, how could 
such thoughts unworthy of our line, arise in thy mind ? In 
this race, the eldest brother of all is installed in the kingdom : 
the other brothers remain under him. O fell one, thou dost 
not, I think, know the morality of kings, or the consequence 
that attends its faithful observance. Of all the princes, the 
eldest is always installed as the king. Even this is the accept- 
ed principle of all sovereigns — specially the descendants of 
Ikshw&ku. But to-day the pride of character of those whose 
virtue was their sole concern,* and who shone in the 
character of their line, has been humbled through thy 
instrumentality. And how, O highly exalted lady, O thou that 
wast bom in a royal race, could such reprehensible fatuity take 
possession of thy senses ? But, O thou bent upon sin, I will 
by no means fulfil the wish of thee by whom hath been 
brought in the first instance this calamity calculated to end 
my existence. Further, O sinless one, I will do this at present 
to displease thee : I will bring from the forest my brother 
dear unto his relatives. And having brought back Rama, 
l will in a perfectly contented spirit, become the slave of 
that one of flaming energy.” The high-souled Bharata afflict- 
ed (his mother) with multitudes of words causing pain ; and 
distressed with grief, emitted sounds like unto a lion in the 
cave of Mandara. 

♦ Another interpretation is Whose virtm is tktir sob protector. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 



39 6 



&AMAYANA. 



SECTION LX X l V. 



Having thus reproved his mother in great wrath, Bharata 
said again, “Do thou bear thyself from this kingdom, O heart- 
less and wicked Kaikeyi. Having been lost to righteousness, 
do not thou lament me dead. What qualities of thine were 
taxed by the king or the exceedingly virtuous R§ma, that 
both of them simultaneously have come by death and exile 
respectively through thy agency ? O Kaikeyi, thou hast been 
guilty of homicide in consequence of the destruction of this 
race. Do thou go to hell, never to the world attained by my 
father ; since, renouncing RSma dear unto all, thou hast 
committed this sin by thy grim act and brought me into 
fear. Through thee hath my father met with his end, and 
Rcima hath taken refuge in the woods ; and it is through 
thee that I have come to ignominy among all creatures. O thou 
enemy of mine in the guise of a mother ! O fell one ! O thou 
that covetest the kingdom f do thou not speak to me, O 
wicked wretch ! O slayer of thy husband ! it is because of 
thee, stainer of thy race, that Kau^alyi, Sumitr&, and other 
mothers of mine have been overwhelmed with a mighty 
sorrow. Thou art never the daughter of the pious and 
intelligent A^wapati, thou art a R&kshasi born in that race, 
thou that hast destroyed my father's race, inasmuch as the 
virtuous and heroic R&ma ever observing truth hath been sect 
to the woods and my father hath ascended heaven through 
thy agency ; inasmuch as thou that hast perpetrated this 
arch offence, ha£t laid this sin on me, who have been 
forsaken by my sire, renounced by my brothers, and come 
by universal disfavor. O thou of sinful ways, having separ- 
ated the virtuous KaufalyB (from her son), what world, O 
thou that repairest to hell, shall be thy portion ? Dost thou 
not, O tortuous one, know that that one sprung from 
Ku^alya's, self, my eldest brother R&raa, who is like a 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYAKANDAM. 



397 



father unto rue, has ever been the refuge of his friends ? A 
son born from ail the limbs of his mother, comes out from 
her heart ; and therefore it is that he is far dearer unto his 
mother, albeit her friends are dear to her*. Once on a time, it 
is related by persons cognizant of morality, Surabhi regarded 
by the celestials, beheld two of her sons toiling on earth and 
seeming to be deprived of their senses. And, when the day 
had been half spent, seeing her sons fatigued on earth, she 
stricken with grief for them, began to weep with tears 
flooding her eyes. And it came to (5ass that as the magnani- 
mous sovereign of the celestials was passing below, her fine 
and fragrant tear drops fell on his person. Turning his eyes 
up, Sakra found Surabhi stationed in the sky, distressed and 
weeping in extreme anguish of spirit. Seeing that illustrious 
one burning in grief, the wielder of the thunder-bolt, Indra 
the lord of the celestials, waxing anxious, with joined hands 
said, ‘Is there any great danger in any quarter? Do thou, 
O tbou that art intent on the welfare of all, say, whence is 
this grief of thine ?’ Thus addressed by the intelligent king of 
the celestials, that one well skilled in speech, the sedate Surabhi 
answered, 'Auspiciousness, O lord of celestials ! No sin is 
yours. But I mourn my sons fallen into evil plight, having 
seen them lean, distressed, and burnt by the rays of the sun — 
Valivarddhas afflicted by the wicked-minded ploughman. 
Seeing those that have been born of my body, cast down and 
in trouble, I grieve : there is none that is dear like unto a son.’ 
Seeing her the whole earth is filled with whose sons by thou- 
sands, weeping, Indra understood that none is an object of 
greater affection than a son. And that lord, Indra, also consi- 
dered Surabhi of a person breathing a sacred odour, whose 
tears had dropped on his body, as the foremost being on 
earth. Even that one yeilding whatever is asked, auspicious, 

• A ngapratyangaja : lit., bom from the limbs principal and minor. The 
commentator recounts the face, the breast, the abdomen, the hands and the 
feet as constituting the former ; and eyes, fingers, &c., as the latter. 



Digitized by t^ooQle 





598 



RAM AY AN A. 



crowned with the choicest virtues, although having all natural 
functions, showing equal kindness unto all, and of unequalled 
character, who maintaineth all creatures, she who hath a thou- 
sand sons, grieves (for her sons). How can then Kau^alyS. 
carry on existence without R&ma ? Chaste and having an only 
son, that lady has through thee been separated from her son, 
(like a cow separated from her calf)* For this, thou wilt always 
have to suffer misery alike in this world and the next. I shall 
for my part completely minister unto my brother and father ; 
and shall, without doubt, increase my fame. Bringing hither 
the mighty-armed lord of Ko^ala endowed with immense 
strength, I myself will repair to the forest inhabited by asce- 
tics. O thou that hast delivered thyself over to iniquity, I, 
looked at by the citizens with their throats oppressed with 
the vapour of grief, cannot bear this (burden orf) sin heaped 
on me by thee. Do thou enter fire, or dive into Dan- 
daka, or wound a cord round thy neck : other desirable way 
there is none for thee. On RSLma having truth for prowess, 
obtaining the earth, I, my disgrace removed, shall be blest.” 
Grieving thus, Bharata, like an elephant in the forest afflicted 
with a tomara or ankusa ; * fell to the earth sighing like an 
enraged snake. With his eyes reddened, and bis cloth 
falling off, and his ornaments cast away, that subduer of 
foes, the king’s son fallen on the earth, resembled a banner 
of Sakra after the festival is over. 



SECTION LXXV. 



JjLrising after a long while when he had regained his cons- 
ciousness, Bharata endowed with prowess, regarding his 
distressed mother with eyes filled with tears, began to tax her 



• Names of instruments. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





A YODHY AKANDAM 



399 



in the midst of the courtiers : “I had never desired the king* 
dom. I had never consulted my mother. Nor did I know 
the installation that had been thought of by the monarch. I 
was then living in a far country in company with Satrughna. 

I did not know the banishment of the magnanimous Rama to 
the woods, or the exile of Sumitra's son ; nor did I know how 
Sit§ came to be banished.” As the high-souled Bharata was 
thus wailing, Kau9aly& recognizing his voice spoke unto 
Sumitrii, ‘‘Come is Bharata, the son of that one of crooked 
ways. I am desirous of seeing the far-sighted Bharata.” 
Having said this unto SumitrS, that one emaciated and with 
a pallid countenance, trembling and almost deprived of sensa- 
tion, went to where Bharata was. And it came to pass that 
the king* s son, Bharata, along with Satrughna had just then 
by the way that led to the same, been proceeding to 
Kaucaly&*s quarter. Then Satrughna and Bharata seeing 
the aggrieved Kau9aly&, embraced the stricken and fallen 
lady wellnigh deprived of her senses. Thereupon, weep- 
ing from grief, the noble and intelligent KaucalyS exceeding- 
ly afflicted, embracing them as they indulged in sorrow, 
said unto Bharata, “Thus hast thou, that hadst desired the 
kingdom, received it rid of its thorn. Alas ! it has been 
speedily obtained through the crooked act of Kaikeyi. What 
is the good that is perceived by Kaikeyi of tortuous sight 
in sending away my son clad in bark to the woods ? It 
behoveth Kaikeyi to send me also speedily to where is stay- 
ing my illustrious son furnished with a gold-gleaming navel. 
Or first performing the fire-sacrifice, I followed by SumitrS, 
will myself happily seek the way by which R&ghava (has 
gone to the woods). Or it behoveth thee to thyself bring 
me unto the place where that foremost of men, my son, is 
performing austerities. This spacious kingdom abounding 
in corn and wealth, and filled with elephants, horses, and 
cars, is thine, having been conferred on thee (by Kaikeyi).” . 
Thus reproached by many a harsh word, the sinless Bharata 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




400 



Rama van a. 



felt exceeding pain like unto that produced by pricking 
a sore with a needle. Exceedingly agitated, he fell at 
Kau^alySL's feet, lamenting much, and well nigh deprived of 
his senses. Bharata then regained his consciousness, and 
with joined hands answered Kau^alyS lamenting thus and 
overcome with excess of sorrow, saying, — “O noble lady, 
what for dost thou censure me who am without sin and who 
know nothing of this ? Thou knowest that profuse is my 
delight in Raghava. May the sense of him never follow 
scripture, that had approved the exile into the woods of that 
foremost of the good, the noble R£ma intent on truth ! May 
such a person as had approved the exile unto the woods 
of the noble one undergo servitude at the hands of the 
sinful, answer the calls of nature facing the Sun, and kick a 
sleeping cow with his feet ! May he that had approved the 
exile of the noble one into the woods come by the sin that is 
reaped by a master who withholds salary from servants after 
the ceremony is over ! May that one that had approved the 
exile of the noble Rlma to the woods, be guilty of the sin 
that is his that injures a sovereign engaged in ruling his 
subjects like sons ! May the person that had approved the 
exile of the noble one to the woods, reap the sin of his that 
having taken a sixth part of their incomes, does not protect 
his subjects! May he that had approved the exile of the 
noble one to the woods, come by the demerit that is his that 
denies Dakshin&s unto ascetics in a sacrifice, after having 
promised them the same ! May he that had approved the exile 
into the woods of the noble one, never discharge the duty 
of the good in the field thronged with elephants and horses and 
cars, and bristling with arms ! May the wicked wight that 
had approved the exile of the noble one to the woods bring 
to naught the subtle scriptural knowledge which has been 
carefully taught him by his intelligent preceptor ! May that 
one that had approved the exile of the noble (R&ma) to the 
woods never behold the long-armed and broad-shouldered 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHY A K A ND A M. 



401 



(Raghava) resembling the Sun and the Moon in energy 
seated (on the throne) ! May that one void of aversion, that 
had approved of the exile of the noble one to the woods feed 
on Payaca,i Krisara , and goat’s flesh, which have not been 
offered in sacrifice ; and may he insult his spiritual precept- 
or ! May he that had approved the exile of the noble one 
to the woods touch a cow with his feet, revile his superiors, 
and injure his friends ! May that one of wicked soul that 
had approved of the exile of the noble one into the 
woods divulge any defects (of another’s character) that 
have been communicated to him in strict confidence 1 May 
he that had approved the exile of RSLma to the woods, 
never repay any good act, be ungrateful abandoned by all, — 
the object of universal execration ! May he that had ap- 
proved of the exile into the woods of the noble one, eat 
alone in his home, although surrounded by sons and wives 
and servitors ! May he that had approved of the exile 
of the noble one, die without obtaining wives worthy of him, 
without sons, without any good works performed ! May he 
that had approved the exile of the noble one into the woods, 
never see his own offspring, and not attaining ripe age, may 
he mourn his wives ! And may he come by the sin that is 
reaped by slaying a king, a woman, a boy, or an old man, or 
by renouncing those who have claims on his maintenance ! 
May he that had approved the exile of the noble one into the 
woods always feed his family with lac, honey, meat, iron, and 
poison 1 Jday that one that had approved the exile of the 
noble one into the woods, while flying from the engagement 
while it is waxing furious with the foe, come to be killed ! 
May he that had approved of the exile of the noble one into 
the woods, clad in tatters with a skull in hand, like a madman 
range the earth abegging ! May he that had approved the 
exile of the noble one into the woods, be always addicted 
to wine, to women, and to dice ; and may he be swayed 
by lust, anger, &c ! May he that had approved of the 
5 * 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




402 



RAMA FAN A. 



exile of that noble one into the woods, never relish 
virtue, and go after unrighteousness ; add may he shower 
his wealth on the unworthy ! May he that had approv- 
ed the exile of the noble one into the woods, have 
his various accumulated riches by thousands carried off 
by robbers ! May he that had approved of the exile into 
the woods of that noble one, come by the demerit that is 
his who sleepeth during both the twilights ! May he reap 
the sin that is reaped by an incendiary or him that lieth 
with his preceptor’s wife ; or him that wrongs his friend ! 
May he that had approved the exile of that noble one into the 
woods, never serve the gods or the manes of the ancestors 
or his father and mother ! May he that had approved the 
exile of that noble one into the woods, be speedily shut out 
from the world of the good, from their fame, and from their 
acts ! May he that had approved the exile of that long armed 
and broad breasted one, renouncing the ministration of his 
mother, turn his thoughts to evil ! May he that had approved 
the exile of the noble one, becoming impoverished yet 
having to support a large family, and suffering from fever, 
be always miserable ! May he that had approved the exile 
of that noble one render fruitless the hopes of poor people 
cherishing them and looking up (wistfully) ! May he that had 
approved the exile into the woods of the noble one remain- 
ing (always) wicked, cruel and impure, leading an unrigh- 
teous life and being in (continual) fear of his sovereign, 
maintain himself by deceit for ever and a day ! May that 
wicked person that had approved the exile into the woods 
of the noble one disregard his chaste wife remaining near, 
after she has performed her ablutions at the end of her 
season. May his that had approved the banishment into the 
woods of that noble one be the sin that is incurred by a 
Brahmana that has rendered himself sonless. May that one of 
befouled senses that had approved of the exile into the woods 
of that noble one disturb the worship of Br&hmana and 



Digitized by 



Google 




A TODHYARA NDA to. 



403 



milch a cow that has a calf. May that foolish person that 
had approved the exile of that noble one forsaking all plea- 
sure in virtue, seek others wives, renouncing his own wedded 
with sacred rites ! May he that bad approved the exile into 
the woods of that noble one come by the sin that attaches 
to a wine biber or one that administers poison to another ! 
May he that had approved of the exile into the woods of the 
noble one bear the sin that is his that serves a thirsty soul 
with deceit. May he that had approved the exile into the 
woods of that noble one reap the demerit of them that from 
devotion to their respective faiths wrangle from their own 
points of view, as well as that of them that listen to the 
disputation !” Having thus consoled Kau9alya bereft of 
her son and husband, the prince afflicted with distress 
fell down. Then KausalySL addressed the aggrieved 

Bharata (wellnigh) deprived of his senses, swearing strong 
oaths, saying “O son, it grieves me more that thou art 
afflicting my heart by taking oaths. Lucky it is that 
graced with auspicious marks, thou swervest not from 
virtue. My child, for this reason thou wilt attain the 
regions of pious persons. Saying this, Kau 9 alya over- 
powered with emotion, drawing into her lap Bharata attached 
to his brother, and embracing the mighty armed one, gave 
way to grief. And bewailing thus, the mind of the high 
souled (Bharata) wrought with sorrow, was overcome with 
the burden of grief. And fallen on the ground, lamenting, 
senseless, with his intellect overpowered, and momentarily 
heaving sighs, Bharata passed away night in grief. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




404 



RAM A Y ANA. 



SECTION LXXVh 



— ai o — 

As Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi was thus burning in grief r 
that foremost of those skilled in speech, the-saint Vasishtha, 
endowed with excellence of language, said, “Do not weep, 
good betide thee, O illustrious prince. Do thou perform the 
funereal rites of the departed king.” Hearing Vasishtha’s 
words, Bharata cognisant of duty, bowed down to the ground 
and despatched the ministers for performing the last rites. 
And raising from under the oil the body of the king with a 
sallow countenance, and appearing to be asleep, Bharata 
placed it on the ground upon a couch in front adorned with 
various gems. Then overwhelmed with grief, Da 9 aratha’s 
son bewailed him thus, “O king, what was it that thou hadst 
intended to do, I absent and away from home, by banishing 
righteous RSma and the powerful Lakshmana ? Whither 
wendest thou, O mighty monarch, forsaking these aggrieved 
people, who have already been deprived of the lion like 
RUma energetic in action ? O father, thou having ascended 
heaven and R&ma having taken refuge in the woods, who 
now in this city of thine shall protect what the people possess 
and secure unto them what they have not ? Widowed in 
consequence of losing thee, this earth does not look graceful. 
The city appeareth unto me like the night deprived of the 
Moon.” As Bharata was lamenting thus in dejected mood, 
the mighty ascetic Vasishtha again addressed him, saying, “0 
mighty armed one, do thou without indulging in any reflec- 
tions, perform those funeral ceremonies of the monarch 
which ought to be performed.” Thereupon honoring his 
words by saying, “So be it,” he urged speed upon all the 
Ritwigas, priests, and AchSryas. And then those that 
had brought the king's corpse outside from the fire chamber, 
instructed by the Ritwigas and priests according to the 
ordinance began to offer oblations into the fire. Next placing 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A VODHYA KANDA M 



405 



the king deprived of life on a car, the servants with their 
throats oppressed with vapour and with their minds weighed 
down with dejection carried him. And scattering gold and 
silver and various kinds of cloth, on the way, people went in 
front of the king. Others procuring sandal, aguru and other 
resinous incenses, sarala , padmaka and devaduru , cast it 
(on the earth). And drawing near the king there, Ritwigas 
laid various other fragrant substances on the funeral pile. 
Then offering oblations into the fire, the Ritwigas began 
to recite japa ; and as laid down in the scriptures, S&ma 
singers chanted Samas. And by means of litters and other 
conveyances, each mounted according to her rank, the 
wives of the king went out from the city, surrounded 
by aged men. And Ritwijas went round the corpse of 
the king who performed many sacrifices leaving it on 
the left side. And kindling with grief, the females also 
headed by KausalyS. (circumambulated the pyre). And 
then there was heard the wail of women distressed 
with grief weeping piteously by thousands like unto 
Kraunchis. Weeping again and again with their sense lost, 
the wives of the king alighted from the car on the banks of 
the Sarayu. Having performed the watery rites, the wives 
of the monarch as well as the counsellors and priests, in 
company with Bharata entering the city with tears in their 
eyes, spent ten days* in mourning lying down on the 
ground. 



SECTION LX X V I I . 



Wi 



hen the ten days had gone by, the king's son, his 



uncleanness (consequent on the demise of his father) 



* The Smriti lays down twelve days of mourning for kings, and sixteen for 
Kshatriyas. Parasara, however, fixes ien days for Kshatriyas in general.. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





406 



RAM A YANA. 



removed, performed the sr&ddha on the twelfth day. On 
the occasion of the ceremonies for the welfare of the departed 
spirit, the son of the king conferred on Brthmanas wealth 
and gems, and rice in abudance, and herds of goats, and 
silver in profusion, and countless kine, and maid-servants and 
man-servants, and vehicles and spacious mansions. And on 
the thirteenth day, the long armed Bharata, overwhelmed with 
grief, burst into lamentation. And coming to the foot of the 
funeral pyre for gathering the bones of the departed, he 
overcome with grief, with his throat obstructed with the 
sounds of lamentation, said, “my father, on brother RSma, 
to whom I had been consigned by thee, having gone to the 
forest, I have been cast by thee into vacancy. My father, 
forsaking forlorn mother Kau^alySL, whose stay her son, 
had gone to the forest, where hast thou gone, O king?” 
And seeing the spot where lay the bones of his father mixed 
with ashes and embers, Bharata looking at the place where 
occurred the dissolution of his father's frame, carried away by 
emotion, indulged in sorrow. And seeing this, he exceed- 
ingly distressed, crying fell down to the ground. And raised 
up (by others) he looked like an uplifted banner of Sakra 
bound to an engine. And his counsellors rushed towards 
that one of pure vows, like the saints making towards Jayati 
as he was falling on the extinction of his merit. Seeing 
Bharata plunged in grief, Satrughna remembering the king, 
fell down to the ground deprived of consciousness. And 
devoid of sense and like a madman, he in grief of heart be- 
gan to lament remembering all the virtues of his father again 
and again. “This terrible sea of grief owing its origin to 
MantharS, containing its ferocious aquatic animal in the 
shape of Kaikeyi, and incapable of being disturbed in 
consequence of the bestowal of the boon drowns (us). 0 
father, where hast thou gone, leaving the tender and youth- 
ful Bharata fondled by thee, to lament (thy loss). Thou didst 
use to confer on us eatables and drinkables and attires and 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYA KA NDA M . 



407 



ornaments. Who will now do so ? Deprived of thee, the 
high souled king cognisant of duty, the earth albeit her time 
of riving is come, is not yet riven. My father having gone 
to heaven and RSLma having sought the woods, how can I 
live? I will enter fire. Bereft of my brother and sire, I 
will not enter the empty Ayodhya governed by the Ikshw&kus. 
I will repair to the forest of asceticism.” Hearing his 
lamentations and seeing that disaster, all the followers 
became all the more distressed. Then depressed and exhaus- 
ted, both Satrughna and Bharata rolled on the earth like two 
bulls with their horns fractured. Then the all-knowing 
priest of their father possessed of sterling worth, Vasishtha, 
raising Bharata, said unto him, ”0 Lord this is the thirteenth 
day since the cremation of thy sire. Why dost thou delay, 
when thou hast to collect the bones ? Three couples* pertain 
in especial to all creatures and these being inevitable, thou 
ought not to bear yourself thus. And Sumantra also versed 
in the nature of things, raising up Satrughna and pacifying 
him, discoursed the birth and death of all beings. Being 
raised up, those renowned chiefs of men looked like Indr&’s 
banner stained by shine and shower. And as the princes 
stood there shedding tears, with reddened eyes, and speak- 
ing sadly, the courtiers urged them on in behalf of the rites 
that remained. 



SECTION LXXVIII. 



Then Satrughna, the younger brother of Lakshmana 
spoke unto Bharata burning in grief as he was revolving in 
his mind the (intended) journey (to Rima), “Need it be said 
that R2ma is the refuge both of himself and all creatures in 

• Hunger and thirst, ignorance and grief, sickness and death. 

S" 



Digitized by L^OOQle 




408 



RAM AY ANA. 



trouble ? That Rlma possessed of strength hath been exiled 
into the woods by a woman ! And powerful and having 
prowess, why did not Lakshmana deliver RSLma by checking 
our father ? The king bent upon following an unrighteous 
course through the influence of a woman, should, the justice 
or otherwise of the measure being fully weighed, at the very 
outset have been checked.” As Lakshmana’s younger brother 
Satrughna was speaking thus, appeared there at the door in 
front the hump backed one adorned with every kind of 
ornament, with her body besmeared with sandal paste, 
wearing regal apparel, and variously decked out with a 
variety of ornaments. And adorned with elegant cones, 
and divers other superb ornaments, she looked like a female 
monkey tethered with a rope. At that time seeing that 
one of horrible misdeeds, (Bharata) who stood near the 
door, seizing the hump backed one ruthlessly, took her unto 
Satrughna, and said, “That one through whom R&ma has 
gone to the wood and our father has renounced his body 
this is that wicked and remorseless one. Do thou deal with 
her as thou likest.” At Bharata's command Satrughna 
observing vows waxing exceedingly aggrieved, addressed 
all the inmates of the inner apartment, saying, “This one 
has occasioned intense misery unto my father and brothers 
Let her now take the fruit of her fell deed.” Having said 
this, he furiously fell upon the hump backed one surrounded 
by her maids. Thereupon she with her cries made the 
chamber resound. Concluding Satrughna fired with rage, 
her associates extremely pained, fled away in all directions. 
Then her companions in a body took counsel of each other, 
saying, “considering the way in which he has entered upon 
, it, he will annihilate us quite. Let us therefore seek the 
protection of the tender hearted generous, pious and illustri- 
ous Kau^alyS. Even she is our sure refuge. Overpowered 
with rage, that chastiser of foes, Satrughna, dragged the 
shrieking hump backed one to the ground. As Manthari 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A Y0DH7A K4 NDAM. 



+P9 

was pushed this way and that, her various ornaments w^fe 
scattered over the floor. And strewn with those ornapeqt?, 
the graceful chamber of the palace looked like the autvnfnol 
fi ornament. And that foremost of men possessed of strength 
bolding her, began to reprove Kaikeyi with harsh speech. 
Extremely hurt by those rough words, Kaikeyi terrified on 
account of $atrugbna« took refuge with her son. Thereupon 
casting his eyes on Satrughpa, Bharafa ,said, "A woman is 
incapable of being slain by any. Do thou therefore excuse 
her. 1 myself would have slain this wicked Kaikeyi of impious 
derds, if the righteous R&ma should not be displeased with 
see on account pf my slaying my mother. And if RSghava 
knows that die hump-backed One hath been slain, he surely 
will speak neither with thee nor me.” Hearing Bbarata's 
words, Satrughpa, younger brother unto Lakshmana, refrained 
from that wrong and set free the hump-backed .woman in a 
sarpon. Thereat, sighing hard fn exceeding grief, Nfanthara 
flung herself at Kaikeyi’s feet, weeping piteously. Seeing 
the hump-backed one deprived of her senses in consequence 
of the pushing she had received at the h^nds pf Satrpghna, 
Bbarata's mother consoled fhat distressed woman, who 
appeared like a Kraunchi that bad been entrapped. 



8ECTION LXXIX. 



T*«. on the morning of the fourteenth day, the ministers 
of the king assembled addressed Bharata in the following 
words, “Having exiled his eldest son and the exceedingly 
strong Lakshmana, Dacaratha who was the superior of our 
superiors hath gone to heaven. Do thou, therefore, O illus- 
trious prince, become our king. Having been permitted by 
the king, thou wilt commit no fault {by doing so), as this 
kingdom is without a master. O Rlghava, having procured 
5 * 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




410 



RAMA YANA. 



all these necessaries for the installation, the counsellors and 
others as well as the citizens wait, O king’s son. Do thou, 
O Bharata, take charge of this secure kingdom bequeathed 
bv thy father and grandfather. Do thou, O foremost of men, 
have thyself sprinkled, and rule over us." Thereupon, 
having gone round all the things procured for the sprinkling, 
Bharata firm in his vows addressed those persons, saying, 
“In our line it is ever fit for the first-born alone to perform 
the task of government. It doth not behove ye who are 
wise to say so unto me. Certainly R£ma our eldest brother 
shall become the king ; and I will abide in the forest for 
five and nine years. Do ye array the grand and mighty 
army consisting of fourfold forces. I will bring back from 
the forest my eldest brother Rlghava. And taking all these 
necessaries for the investiture in front, I will go in the 
direction of the forest for Rama. And sprinkling that chief 
of men on the spot, I will placing him in our front, bring 
Rama back, like unto fire brought in from the sacrifice. I 
will never fulfil the desire of this lady proud of her son. I 
will inhabit the impracticable woods, and R£ma shall become 
the monarch. Let workmen lay out level roads in uneven 
tracts ; and let those men that are adepts in threading places 
difficult to pass through, follow us." When the prince had 
spoken thus in behalf of R5ma, all those persons answered 
him in these excellent words, “For saying this, may Lakshmi 
seated on the lotus remain at thy side ; inasmuchas thou 
wishest to confer the earth on the eldest son of the 
monarch !*’ Hearing that graceful speech of the king’s son, 
tear-drops, begot of delight began to trickle from their eyes 
and adorned those noble countenances. And their grief 
removed, with cheerful hearts, the counsellors, courtiers, 
and others hearing that speech (of the prince), said, 
“O best of men, according to thy order, artizans as well as 
people cherishing a high regard for thee have been directed 
to lay out a road." 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYA KAN DA M. 



SECT t O N LX X X . 



411 



The. set out in advance persons having a knowledge of 
the humidity or otherwise of the soil, men skilled in making 
tents, brave delvers engaged in their proper work; those 
capable of constructing canals and water courses, people on 
pay, car-makers, men preparing machines, carpenters, those 
intended to guard the ways, pioneers, cooks, perfumers, 
makers of wicker-ware and able guides. And as the 
mighty throng began to proceed, it resembled the swell 
of the sea on the occasion of a parva . And numbers 
of men skilled in road-constructing went before furnished 
with various implements. And hewing away boughs, and 
plants and shrubs and woody projections, stones, and diverse 
trees, they went on preparing a road. And they set up trees 
where there were none, and at places they felled trees by 
means of axes, tankas , and daes } others possessed of greater 
strength and more powerful, with their hands uprooted masses 
of Virana and here and there leveled a rising ground. And 
others filled up with dust wells and capacious hollows, and 
speedily leveled deep places alf around. And those men threw 
bridges wherever they became necessary, and broke the 
earth wherever such a process was required, and excavated 
whenever it was necessary. In a short time, they made places 
poor of water overflow with many and various expanses 
resembling the ocean. And in tracts void of water, they 
digged divers receptacles of water, decorated with daises. 
And the way of the army, furnished with pavements of 
bricks and clay, with trees bearing blosoms, eloquent with 
the tunes of birds, decorated with pennons, sprinkled with 
sandal showers, and garnished with flowers of various kinds, 
looked exceedingly beautiful, like unto the way of the celes- 
tials. Then having received the command of Bharata, the 
men that were in charge of the tents, ordered (the workmen) 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




RAM AY AN A. 



4ti 

to pitch the tents, and when they had been pitched at a 
romantic spot filled with tasteful fruits, in consonance with 
the injunction of the high-souled Bharata, the men decorated 
splendidly the tent* which themselves were like the orna- 
ments 6f the road. And under an auspicious star and at a 
favorable Kbur, then Well Up m the work set thfc encampment 
of the high-souled Bharata. And the tents surrounded by an 
entrenchment paved with dust* containing images made of 
sapphires, graced with goodly thoroughfares, lined with 
edifices, encircled by towers and waUs, decorated with 
streamers, having well-made high-ways, and appearing 
like celestial daises and containing Stately mansions 
with dove-cotes, res&nblfed the metropolis of Sakra him- 
self. And passing by the Jahnavi abounding in various 
trees and woods, of cool and crystal waters, and fitted with 
fnighty fishes, that way ot the chief Of men constructed by 
artizans, looked more and more lovely as it proceeded, as the 
unclouded sky looks beautiful at night, adorhed with innu- 
merable stars. 



SECTION L XXXI . 



A hen Seeing that the night in which had been performed 
the auspicious preliminary ceremonies, Was about to be spent, 
eulogists and gfenealdgists hymned Bharata with consecrated 
hymns. And then Sounded the kettle-drum, beaten by a golden 
Stick, announcing the departure of the night ; and people 
bounded conchs and other instruments by hundreds furnish* 
ed with Soft and loud sounds. And as if filling the heavens* 
those powerful blasts of the trumpet repeatedly rendered 
Bharata burning in grief the more aggrieved. Then awaking 
and silencing those sounds with Saying— “I am not the king/’ 
he said unto Satrughna, “Behold, O Satrughna, in what a 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODffY A KA ND A M. 



4iS 

mighty wrong the people are engaged, on account of Kaikeyi. 
The king Da^aratha has gone away throwing down on me 
(the burthen of) this misery. The royal grace founded in 
righteousness of that magnanimous and virtuous monarch is 
wandering even like a boat on water having no helmsman. 
And he Who is oar mighty master hath been banished into the 
woods by this mother of mine! who had (in doing so) re- 
nounced virtue/’ Seeing Bharata lamenting thus senseless, 
the ladies afflicted with sorrow began to wail in winsome 
accents. As Bharata Was mourning thus, the highly famous 
and virtadus Vasishtha accompanied by his disciples entered 
the court of the Ikshwaku king : built of entire gold, charm- 
ing! dazzling with gems and gold : like unto SudharmS itself. 
Sitting down on a golden seat furnished with an elegant 
cover, that one Versed in aH the Vedas commanded the 
entoyS, saying, — “Do ye speedily with collected minds bring 
hither Br&hmanas aiid Kshatriyas and warriors and coun* 
sellors and generals of forces and Satrughna with the other 
prindes, and the famous Bharata and Yudh&jit* and Sumantra 
and others that are engaged in our welfare.” Then there 
arose a mighty hubbub occasioned by people coming up in 
cars, horses and elephants. And when Bharata arrived, the 
subjects rejoiced as they used to rejoice on DacarSLtha’s 
arrival 5 and as rejoiced the immortals on the arrival of him 
of an hundred sacrifices. And then the court resembling a 
m<Weles4 oCean containing whales and serpents,t and gems 
and Conchs and gold-mines, being graced with the presence 
of Datar&tha’s son* looked splendid as it formerly did with 
that of Dasar&tha himself. 

• On© of the counsellors. — T. 

t Nagd may also mean hypopotamus. — T. 



Digitized by L^ooQle 



414 



RAMA VAN A. 



SECTION lx x x 1 1 . 



ALnd then the intelligent Bharata surveyed that assembly 
filled with noble, and worthy personages, resembling the 
night of the full mooh. And that august assembly was 
ablaze with the brilliant hues proceeding from the attires of 
the honorable persons seated according to rank. And that 
splendid assembly filled with learned people looked like the 
night of the full moon after the clouds have dispersed. And 
seeing all the subjects of the sovereign gathered together r 
the priest cognizant of virtue soflty spoke unto Bharata, 
“My child, leaving unto thee this prosperous earth abounding 
in corn and wealth, king Da$aratha having performed his 
duties, hath gone to heaven. And R£ma of truthful character 
observing the virtue of the righteous hath not set aside his 
father’s commands, even as the risen moon doth not 
renounce the moonlight. Loved by the courtiers, do thou, 
having been installed, enjoy this kingdom conferred on 
thee by thy father and mother, rid of its thorn. Let 
princes throned as well as those without thrones, from east, 
and west, north and south, and also persons ranging 
the sea, procure countless gems (for presenting them 
unto thee.” Hearing this speech, Bharata cognizant of 
virtue, filled with sorrow, mentally repaired to R&ma desir- 
ous of reaping merit. Then in words choked with the melo- 
dious voice of a swan, lamented and taxed the priest, in the 
midst of the assembly, “Who like myself ever deprives one 
that hath led a Brahmacharyya mode of life, that is endowed 
with understanding and performed his bath after having 
acquired learning, and that is always intent on righteous- 
ness, of one’s kingdom ? How begot of Da^aratha, shall 
I deprive R&ma of his kingdom. It behoveth thee to speak 
righteousness before this assembly. First-born, and fore- 
most in merit, righteous-souled, and comparable unto Dilipa 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHVAKANDAM 



415 



and Nahusha, KSkutstha deserves the kingdom, just as 
Da^aratha did. If I commit myself to this sin dishonorable 
and calculated to bring me to perdition, I shall in this world 
bring disgrace on the race of the IkshwSkus. I do not at 
all relish the sin that has been committed by my mother. 
Remaining here with joined hands I bow down unto Rama 
gone to the forest fastness. I will follow R2ma. That best 
of men is the king. Rlghava deserves the dominion of the 
three worlds themselves.” Hearing those words informed 
with righteousness, the entire assembly with their minds 
intent upon R£ma, from joy shed tears. “If I fail to bring 
back the noble one from the forest, I will like the exalted 
Lakshmana remain even in that forest, 1 will in presence 
of this mixed assembly of pious and honorable persons 
following every perfection, adopt every expedient to bring 
back R&ma. I have already despatched beforehand persons 
serving for love as well as those for money, and layers of roads 
and their keepers ; and I intend setting out now. 11 Having 
said this, the virtuous Bharata attached unto his brother spoke 
to Sumantra skilled in counsel, who was by, saying, “Up, 
and go, O Sumantra. at my command. Do thou make known 
this journey and bring the forces.” Thus accosted by the 
magnanimous Bharata, Sumantra with a cheerful heart issued 
orders concerning everything desirable as he was ordered. 
Hearing that the army had been ordered to march forth for 
bringing back R&ma, the subjects as well as the generals of 
the forces became exceedingly delighted. Hearing of the 
journey to R&ma, for bringing him back the wives of the sol- 
diers apprised of the order that had been issued to the latter, 
being exceedingly delighted, hurried on. And the generals 
expeditiously despatched their forces with warriors by means 
of horses and carts and cars fleet as the mind. Seeing those 
forces marshalled, Bharata staying near his preceptor, said 
unto Sumantra who was at his side, “Do thou speedily bring 
my car.” In obedience to the mandate of Bharata, Sumantra 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




4i6 



ramayana. 



exceedingly rejoiced, appeared with Ihe car yoked with 
superb steeds. Then <that powerful descendant of Raghu 
of truthful character, and having unswerving truth for hi s 
prowess, Bharata, having said what was fit, spoke words 
calculated to gladden his illustrious superior gone to the 
mighty -forest, “0 Sumantra, arise thou speedily and, £hy 
desire fully attained, go by my command, and tell the chiefs 
of the army, and our principal adherents tQ array the forces/' 
Thereat rising, R&yanyas and Vai^yas, and Vrishalas ; and 
Vipras in every house began to yoke camels and cars and 
mules and elephants and excellent steeds. 



SECTION lxxxiii. 



Xvising with the morrow, (Bharata anxious to behold 
R&ma, speedily set out ascending an excellent car. Before 
him went the councellors and priests, ascending cars resembl- 
ing that of the Sun yoked with steeds. And a thousand 
elephants duly consecrated went in the wake of that son 
of the Iksbw&ku line as he was proceeding* And six thousand 
cars with bow-men furnished with various weapons fol- 
lowed the Illustrious prince Bharata as be was proceeding. 
And a hundred thousand horses mounted (by riders) wen! 
in the wake of that descendant of Raghu intent upon truth 
and having his senses under control. And Kaikeyi and 
Sumitr& and the highly famous KaucaJyl rejoicing at the 
prospect of the bringing of ; Rima, went in an effulgent car. 
And tbe : honorable persons (belonging to all the three orders) 
went with the object of beholding R&ma in company with 
Laksbmana. And they with glad hearts variously conversed 
with. each other, “When shall we see the mighty armed R&ma 
sable Kke unto a cloud, of steady strength, dm in vows, 
the remover of the world's grief ? As soon as we shall .see 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYA KAN DA M, 



4*7 



him, Rftghava will remove our sorrow ; even as the Sun aris- 
ing dispells the darkness of the entire world.” Thus cheer- 
fully carrying on an auspicious talk, the citizens embracing 
each other went along. And all others, and the foremost mer- 
chants as well as all the principal classes, joyfully went in 
quest of Rftma. And a number of gem-cutters, and goodly 
potters, weavers, and armourers, and peacock-dancers, 
sawers, and perforators of gems, glass-makers, and workers in 
ivory, cooks, incense-sellers, well»known goldsmiths, and 
wool-manufacturers, bathers in tepid water, shampooers, 
physicians, makers of Dhupas , and wine-sellers, washermen, 
and tailors, and actors in numbers with females, and Kaivartas, 
and persons versed in Vedas having their minds in control, 
and Brfthmanas of reputed character, and persons well dressed 
and attired in pure habits, with their bodies daubed with 
coppery unguents, by thousands followed Bharata on carts. 
All these gradually followed Bharata by means of excellent 
vehicles. And the army delighted and in high spirits went 
in the wake of Kaikeyi’s son attached unto his brother, 
going to bring back his brother. Going far by means of cars, 
vehicles, elephants, and horses, they arrived at the Gangft near 
Sringaverapura, where was peacefully staying that friend of 
Rftma, the heroic Guha, surrounded by his relatives, ruling 
the realm. Having come to the banks of the Gangft graced 
with Chakravftkas, the army which was following Bharata 
halted. Seeing the army inactive as well as the Gangft of 
sacred waters, Bharata versed in speech spoke unto the 
courtiers, “Do you communicating unto all our intentions, 
encamp the army. Having been fatigued, we shall cross the 
ocean-going Gangft on the morrow. Having crossed the 
stream, I am anxious to offer its water unto the monarch, who 
has gone to heaven, in behalf of his spiritual body.” When 
he had said this, the courtiers with collected minds saying, 
“Be it so,” disposed their forces, each according to his wish. 
Having on the mighty stream, Gangft, quartered his forces 
53 



Digitized by t^ooQle 




4i8 



RAMAYANA. 



furnished with all appliances for the journey, Bharata remained 
there, revolving the means of making the high-souled Rima 
turn back. 



SECTION LXXXIV. 



Seeing the forces with banners flying quartered on the 
banks of the river Gang*, and engaged in various occupations, 
the lord of the Nishadas, Guha, said unto his relatives ranged 
around, “This mighty host here appeareth like an ocean. 
I do not find its end even by thinking of it in my mind. 
Surely the foolish Bbarata hath come hither himself : on his 
car appears the huge KovidSra banner. Belike, he will either 
bind us by nooses or slay us and next Dataratha’s son R&ma 
banished from the kingdom by his sire. Desirous of taking 
complete possession of the rare regal fortune of that 
sovereign (Rama), Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, comes to destroy 
him. Rama the son of Dafaratha is both my maintainer 
and friend. Do ye in his interests, donning on your mail, 
wait on the banks of the river. And stationed on the river 
Ganga, let my powerful retainers subsisting on fruits and 
roots and meat, be prepared for opposing Bharata 's passage 
over the river. And let hundreds upon hundreds of Kaivarta 
youths accoutred in mail remain in each of five hundred 
barks." — Guha issued this order. “But if Bharata be well 
disposed towards Rama, this host shall today safely cross 
the Ganga." Having said this, the lord of the Nishadas, 
Guha, taking a present of flesh, fish and honey, went out for 
interviewing Bharata. Seeing Guha approaching, the power- 
ful son of the charioteer knowing season, humbly informed 
Bharata of it, saying, “This lord (that approaches) surrounded 
by his relatives, is very potent in Dandaka and is an old 
friend of your brother. Therefore let Guha, the lord of the 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




JtYQDRYA KA NDA AI. 



419 



Ifish&das, see you, O Kkkutstha. He indubitably knows 
where Rlma and Lakshmana are." Hearing these wise words 
of Sumantra, Bharata at once said, — “Let Guha see me.” 
Receiving permission, Guha, right glad, appeared before 
Bharata, bending low, and said, “This place is thy home. But 
thou hast stolen a march over us. We dedicate all this unto 
thee. Do thou reside in the abode of thy servant. Here are 
fruits and roots gathered by the Nish&das and meat dry and 
moist and various other produces of the forest. I pray that 
entertained in various ways and heartily partaking of meats 
and drinks, this army may spend the night here. Tomorrow 
morning, thou wilt go along with thy forces.’ 1 



SECTION LXXXV. 



Thu, addressed, the exceedingly wise Bharata answered 
the lord of the NishSdas, in words fraught with sense and 
reason, “Thy great desire, O friend of my superior, is surely 
as good as attained ; since thou of mighty energy hast set thy 
heart on entertaining my army.” Having said these fair 
words unto Guha, the graceful and highly energetic Bharata 
again addressed the lord of NishSdas, “By what way shall I 
go to Bharadwaja’s hermitage ? These lands watered by the 
Gang& are dense and hard to track/’ Hearing these words of 
the intelligent son of the king, Guha well acquainted with the 
forest, said with joined hands, “My servant well acquainted 
with the place shall attentively follow thee ; and, O prince 
possessed of mighty strength, I myself will also walk in thy 
wake. But dost thou go after Rlma of energetic acts with some 
evil intention ? This vast force of thine raiseth my appre- 
hension.” When Guha had asked this, Bharata with a pre- 
sence unclouded like the sky, spoke unto Guha these sweet 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




420 



RAM AY AN A. 



words, “May a time never come when I shall do wrong onto 
Rlghava! It behoveth thee not to fear me. Rlghava is 
my eldest brother dear unto me even as my sire himself. I 
go to make Klkutstha dwelling in the woods, turn back. 
Other intention cherish I none. 0 Guha, this I tell thee 
truly. 1 ' Having heard Bharata's speech, Guha with a counte- 
nance lighted up with delight, again cheerfully addressed 
Bharata, saying, “Blessed art thou ! Thy like find I none 
on earth, inasmuch as thou wishest to resign a kingdom 
that comes to thee without search. Thy eternal fame will 
certainly range this world, since thou wishest to bring back 
Rlma passing through misfortune." As Guha was speaking 
thus unto Bharata, the Sun became shorn of his splendour 
and night fell. Thereupon, having disposed his troops, the 
auspicious Bharata gratified by Guha, went to bed along with 
Satrughna. Then arose thoughts of Rlma in the mind of 
the magnanimous Bharata ever having his gaze fixed on 
virtue and undeserving (of hardship). Then even as a 
tree already heated by a forest-fire burns with a fire hidden 
in its cavity, that descendant of Raghu began to burn with the 
fire of grief inflamed in his heart. And perspiration produced 
by the fire of sorrow issued out of all his limbs, as the 
Himavat heated by the solar warmth generates water. And 
Kaikeyi’s son was overpowered and drowned by the mount- 
ain of grief, having thoughts (of Rlma) for its entire crags, 
sighs for its mineral substance, disgust with the avocations 
of life, for its trees, mental feebleness through grief for its 
summits, stupor for the animals inhabiting it, and burning 
for its annual shrubs and bamboos. And sighing heavily with 
a heart oppressed with sorrow, well nigh deprived of 
consciousness, and involved in high peril, that best of men, 
oppressed by the fever of his heart, like unto a mighty leader 
of a herd, separated from it, did not attain peace of 
mind. Meeting with Guha, the magnanimous Bharata accom- 
panied by his people, engrossed with the thoughts of Rlma, 



Digitized by 



Google 




A70DH7ARANDAM . 



4*i 



became oppressed with grief. (Seeing this), Guha by and 
by encouraged Bharata concerning his elder brother. 



8ECTI0N L X XX VI , 



VXuha, acquainted with the forest, described unto Bharata 
of immeasurable prowess the regard the high-souled Laksh- 
mana bore unto Rlma. “To Lakshmana crowned with every 
virtue, waking up, holding the bow with the arrow fixed on 
it for the purpose of guarding well his brother, I said, ‘This 
easeful bed has been prepared for thee, my child. O son of 
Raghu’s descendant, cheer up ! Do thou lie down at 
ease. All these people can bear hardship ; but thou art 
meant for comfort. For protecting him religiously, we shall 
wake. To me also there is none that is dearer on earth than 
Rama. Do not be anxious. This I tell thee truly, through 
his grace I expect high fame among men, and immense 
religious merit, and interest and desire in entirety. Bow in 
hand I shall along with my kin protect Rlma lying down with 
Sit 1. To me always ranging in this forest, nothing whatever 
is unknown. I can even cope in battle with an army of four- 
fold forces. 1 Thus accosted by us, the magnanimous Laksh- 
mana with his gaze ever fixed on virtue, humbly observed, 
‘How, Dagarltha's son sleeping on the earth with SitS, can I 
attain sleep, or life, or happiness ? How see him who is 
capable of bearing in battle the onslaught of the gods and the 
Asuras combined, sleeping in a cave on grass ? It is by 
virtue of mighty austerities and uncommon exertions that 
Da^aratha has obtained this son of his crowned with every 
auspicious sign. He being banished, the king shall not live 
long ; and the Earth shall certainly be widowed soon. 
Having bewailed aloud, by this time have the women got 
exhausted ; and surely the king's mansion is to-day still. I 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




422 



RAMA YANA. 



do not expect that either Kau^alyS or the king or my mother 
is alive. If they live, it can be for this night only. Even 
if my mother live seeing Satrughna, that mother of a hero, 
the afflicted Kau^alyS, will (surely) resign her existence. Say- 
ing — All is lost, — All is lost, — with his desire unattained, my 
father having failed to install R£ma in the kingdom, will resign 
his existence. Blessed are they that when the time shall come 
for the same, shall perform the funeral ceremonies of the king, 
my deceased sire. Then shall they with happy hearts range 
the metropolis of my father, furnished with fair-looking 
terraces, with the highways laid out orderly, crowned with 
lordly edifices, adorned with various gems, crowded by cars 
and elephants and horses, resounding with the notes of trum- 
pets, abounding in auspicious things, filled with fat and con- 
tented people, having gardens and pleasure-houses, and poss- 
essed of divers classes of men indulging festal mirth. Shall we, 
on the occasion of Rama’s return, with glad hearts peacefully 
enter the city in company with that one firm in his promise 7 
As the magnanimous son of the king was thus lamenting, the 
night passed away. In the morning, with an unclouded sun, 
both, having made matted locks on the banks of the BhSgira- 
thi, crossed the river along with me. Wearing matted locks 
and clad in barks of trees, those persons possessed of mighty 
strength, like unto leaders of elephant-herds, equipped with 
excellent arrows and quivers and bows — those repressors of 
foes, expecting (their return from exile), departed with Sit*.” 



SECTION lx x xv 1 1 . 



Hearing the words of Guha, exceedingly unpleasant. 
Bharata as soon as he heard them, became plunged in thought. 
And then taking heart for a while, that tender-framed one 
possessed of immense strength, gifted with leonine shoulders 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




a yobhyakandam : 



4*3 



and length of arms, having expansive eyes resembling white 
lotuses, young in years, and endowed with a handsome 
presence, affected with great grief, was overpowered, like an 
elephant wounded in the heart with a goad. Seeing Bharata 
deprived of his senses with his countenance covered with 
pallor, Guha became exceedingly agitated, like a tree 
during an earthquake. Seeing Bharata in that condition, 
Satrughna who was near, taking the former on his lap, began 
to cry, almost deprived of his senses and oppressed with grief. 
Thereat, all the mothers of Bharata, fasting, undergoing dis- 
tress, and afflicted with the calamity that had befallen their 
lord, came forward, and surrounding Bharata, began to lament 
him fallen on the ground. And the distressed Kau 9 alya 
drawing nigh embraced him like a cow approaching her calf ; 
and weeping from excess of grief, spoke unto Bharata, saying, 
“My son, doth any malady afflict thy body ? Now the life 
of this royal race is, without doubt, in thy hands. R<Lma 
having gone away along with his brother, I shall, O son, live, 
seeing thee. King Da9arStha having departed this life, thou 
alone art our lord. Hast thou, my son, heard anything 
unpleasant concerning Lakshmana ; or the son of that one 
having an only son,* who has gone to the forest along with 
his wife ?” Having taken comfort for a while, that one of 
high fame weeping, and solacing Kau 9 alya, spoke unto Guha, 
saying, “Where did my brother pass the night ? And where 
did SitS. ? And where did, again, Lakshmana ? And in what 
bed did he sleep, and what did he previously partake of ? Do 
thou, O Guha, tell me this.” Thereat, well pleased, Guha, 
the lord of Nist&das, related unto Bharata how he had acted 
in respect of Rama, his dear guest, studious of his welfare. 
“1 procured for R&ma’s use rice and fruits and roots and various 
kinds of food. All these Rama having truth for his prowess 
accepted, but observing Kshatriya morality, he did not take 
them. ‘O friend, we ought not to take anything : ours is always 

• Meaning herself. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




424 



RAMA FAN A. 



vo give.' Thus did that magnanimous one beseech us. On 
the high-souled Lakshmana bringing water, R£ghava hav- 
ing drunk it, fasted along with Site. Then Lakshmana drank 
up the water that remained. Then the three with fixed minds 
silently performed their adorations unto the Twilight. After 
that, Sumitra’s son prepared a goodly bed for R&ghava, him- 
self bringing Ku$a grass. And in that bed lay down R£ma 
in company with Sit i. Next washing their feet, Lakshmana 
turned away. This is the foot of the Ingudi, and this that 
grass. On it both R£ma and SitSL lay down that night 
Fastening on his back a pair of quivers filled with arrows, 
furnished with finger-fences, and taking his mighty bow, 
Lakshmana all night kept watch around. I also taking an 
excellent bow, remained where remained Lakshmana, and 
surrounded by my kindred who stayed there vigilantly, equip- 
ped with bows, guarded him that resembled the mighty Indra.” 



SECTION l xxx vi it . 



Having heard everything, Bharata in company with the 
counsellors went to the foot of the Ingudi tree and saw the 
bed of Rlma. And he said unto his mothers, “That high- 
souled one lay down here on the ground during the night, 
and his limbs pressed this spot. Begot of that foremost of 
monarchs, the exalted and intelligent Da9aratha, R&ma does 
not deserve to sleep on the earth. How can that chief of 
men having reposed in beds furnished with pillows made 
of deer-skins and having superb cloths, have lain down on 
the earth? Always reposing in mansions and in upper 
apartments paved with silver and gold and supplied with 
excellent bed-cloths, decked with heaps of flowers, perfumed 
with sandal and aguru, hued like unto pale clouds, resonant 
with the notes of many parrots, — in palaces going before 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHTA KA NDA M. 



4*5 



the choicest of their class, ringing with music, and perfumed- 
like unto Meru itself, with their bases composed of gold, 
R£ma used to be awakened with vocal and instrumental 
music, the tinklings of elegant ornaments and the peals of 
goodly mridangas — that subduer of foes being in due season 
hymned by the eulogists, and friends, bards and genealogists, 
with worthy ballads and penegeryes. (This assertion of 
R&ma’s lying down on the ground) appears to me incredible : 
it doth by no means look unto me like truth. Forsooth, I 
am amazed. I take it, this is a vision. Verily, no destiny 
is superior to Time, since Da^aratha's son, R§ma himself, 
had to repose on the earth, — and the beauteous beloved 
daughter of Videha's king, and the daughter-in-law of 
Da£aratha, had to lie down on the ground. This was the bed 
of my brother ; on this hard spot did he turn his lovely limbs, 
and this grass was pressed by them. I think that the graceful 
Sit* adorned with ornaments slept in this bed, for here and 
there are scattered particles of gold. It is clear that Site had 
spread her sheet at this spot, — hence it is that fibres of silk 
are discoverable here. I deem that the bed of her lord 
appeareth agreeable unto a wife, since a girl tender and in 
affliction, the chaste daughter of Mithila experienced no 
inconvenience (in sleeping in one such). Ah, I am undone ! 
Baleful am I, for it is on my account that Raghava along with 
his wife, lay down in such a bed, like one forlorn. Born in the 
imperial race, and capable of conferring happiness on all, the 
bringer-about of all good, why did R£ghava of dark blue 
hue like that of a lotus, graceful, and crowned with red eyes, 
the inheriter of happiness and undeserving of misery, — having 
left his dear consummate kingdom, lie down on the ground ? 
Surely the mighty-armed Lakshmana graced with auspicious 
marks is blessed, — he who in the time of dire adversity 
followeth his brother R£ma. And blessed is Videha's 
daughter who followeth her husband into the woods. Bereft 
of that magnanimous one, we have all been brought into 
54 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




426 



ramavana . 



jeopardy. The Earth without her helmsman seemeth unto 
me quite empty, on Da^aratha having ascended the celestial 
regions and Rama taken refuge in the wilderness. On R&ma 
having set up his dwelling in the forest, one (like me) doth 
not even mentally covet this earth which had been protected 
by the immense prowess (of Rlghava). With her walls 
undefended, her horses and elephants unrestrained, and her 
gates left open, the defenceless metropolis deprived of her 
power, placed in peril and without any protection, is surely not 
regarded by the enemies, like food mixed with poison. From 
this day forth I will lie down on the ground, or on the grass, 
daily subsisting on fruits and roots, and bearing matted 
locks and a cloth of bark. And for his sake I will in future 
live happily in the woods. (By my doing so), the promise 
of that high-minded one shall not be rendered null. Me 
residing in the forest in the interests of my brother, Satru- 
ghna shall bear company ; while my noble one will rule 
AyodhySL assisted by Lakshmana. The twice-born ones will 
sprinkle K&kutstha in AyodhyS. May the deities realize this 
desire of mine ! Propitiated by me personally in various ways 
with bent head, if he do not consent, then shall I ever stay with 
R&ghava in the woods. Surely he cannot long persist in 
putting me off.” 



SECTION lxxxix. 



Having spent the night there on the banks of the Gaogfi, 
that descendant of Raghu rising early in th e morn i ng, said 
these words unto Satrughna, “O Satrughna, arise!Why5e<^ J 
est thou ? Bring thou at once that lord of the Nish&dhas, Gnhk ] 
Good betide thee ! He will take the army (over the stream.)” J 
Thus urged by his brother, Satrughna said, 'Thinking of 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYA KA ND A M. 



427 



that noble one (Rlrna), l have not slept, but have remained 
awake in a like manner.”* As those chiefs of men were 
thus conversing with each other, Guha appearing in time 
with joined hands, remarked, “0 KSkutstha, hast thou spent 
the night happily on the banks of the river ? And is it 
continuous good fortune with thee along with thy forces ?” 
Hearing Guh&’s speech fraught with affection, Bharata ever 
obedient unto Rima, spoke on his part, saying, “Happily 
have we spgnt the night ; and we have also been well 
received by thee. Now let thy servants take us over by 
means of many boats.” Thereat, bearing Bharata 1 s mandate, 
Guha, bestirring himself, re-entered the city and addressed his 
kinsfolk, saying, “Arise ye ! Awake ! May good always attend 
you ! Do ye draw up the boats ; I shall ferry the forces 
over.” Thus asked, they arising and bestirring themselves in 
consequence of the king's command, brought up five hundred 
boats around. Others also known by the name of Swastika, 
bearing large bells on their prows, and banners,, well decked 
out, furnished with oars, and manned by bargemen, with their 
joints firmly constructed, (were brought up). And Guha him- 
self brought a graceful barge called Swastika, covered with 
pale woolen cloth, and resounding with music. On this boat 
ascended Bharata, the mighty Satrughna, Kaucalyl, Sumitri, 
and other wives of the king. The priests, and preceptors 
belonging unto the BrUhmana order, had already ascended. 
After (Bharata and others had got up), ascended the wives of 
auxiliary princes, and cars and provisions were got on board. 
And the uproar consequent on the troops burning down dwell- 
ings, pressing down descents unto the river, and loading 
goods, spread on all sides. Then those boats hung with’ pen- 
nons, managed by the kinsfolk (of Guha), set off at speed with 
the teeming folk 5 that had got on board. And some of these 
were filled with women, and some with horses, and some 
conveyed cars and cattle of great value. And going to the 
* 1 . as thou hast done, — T. - - 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




428 



RAM AY AN A. 



other bank and landing the crowds on the shore, the friends 
and slaves (of Guha) while returning, displayed various 
movements (of the boats). And elephants graced with flags 
being spurred on by their riders, began to cross the Stream, 
appearing like (so many) winged hills. Others ascended boats, 
and others crossed on rafts, others crossed by means of 
reversed pitchers, and others by their arms alone. Ferried 
over the Gang* by the servants (of Guha), that beautiful 
army graced with streamers, at the third muhutta arrived 
at the romantic woods of PraySga. Having made the army 
take rest at its ease, and encamped it (at the woods of 
PraySga), that magnanimous one, Bharata, for the purpose 
of seeing the asylum of the ascetic Bharadwija, went thither, 
accompanied by Ritwijas and Sadasyas. 



SECTION lxxxx. 

3 > — t 

Having arrived at (the neighbourhood of) Bharadw&ja's 
asylum, that foremost of men while it was a kroca (to the des- 
tination), left his forces behind and went thither, accompanied 
by his counsellors alone. And leaving his attire and arms, 
and clad in a silk cloth, that pious one placing the priest 
in front, went on foot. Then with the view of seeing 
Bharadw&ja, that descendent of Raghu leaving behind the 
counsellors also, went in the wake of the priest. As 
soon as Bharadw&ja of rigid austerities saw Vasishtha, 
he at once rose from his seat, saying unto him disciples 
“Arghya !” On being called upon by Vasishtha, that 
highly energetic one understood that it was Da9aratha’s 
son. Having offered them (the guests) water to wash 
their feet and Arghya, as well as fruits subsequently, that 
virtuous one (Bharadw&ja) successively enquired after the 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYAKA NDAM. 



4*9 



welfare of their (respective) homes ; ami after that, of the 
forces, exchequer, friends and counsellors in AyodhyA. And 
knowing that Da^aratha had departed this life, he did not 
ask anything relating to the monarch. Then Vasishtha and 
Bharata questioned him as to his welfare in relation to the 
body, the (sacrificial) fire, the trees, the beasts and the birds 
(of the hermitage). To all this returning “So it is,” the 
illustrious BharadwAja from affection for RAghava said unto 
Bharata, “What is the use of thy visit here, seeing that thou 
art engaged in the task of governing the kingdom ? Do thou 
relate all this unto me ; my mind is ill at ease. That slayer 
of foes, and perpetuator of his race who hath been borne by 
Kau^alyA, and who along with his wife and brother hath 
been banished to the woods for a long term — that illustrious 
one who enjoined by his sire in the interests of a woman, 
hath become an inhabitant of the woods for fourteen years — 
dost thou, desirous of securely enjoying the kingdom belong- 
ing to him as well to his younger brother, intend to do 
any harm unto that sinless one ?" Thus accosted, Bharata 
replied unto BharadwAja with tears filling his eyes and his 
words choked with grief, “Undone am I if the reverend 
one also deems me so. Do not apprehend any wrong from 
me ; and do thou not reproach me thus. Whatever my 
mother has said in relation to me, does not express my wish. 
I am not satisfied with that, nor do I endorse her speech. 
I, intending to pacify him, am going to that chief of men, 
with the view of taking him unto AyodhyA and of paying 
homage unto his feet. Thinking me as already gone, thou 
shouldst show thy favor unto me. O reverened Sir, tell me 
where stayeth at present RAma, lord of the earth.” Be- 
sought by Vasishtha and the other Ritwijas, the venerable 
BharadwAja well pleased, spoke unto Bharata, “O foremost 
of men, even this is worthy of thee. Serving superiors, res- 
traint of the senses, and following the pious, are ever found in 
one sprung in the RAghava line. I know that even this is 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




430 



RAMA FAN A. 



thy intention ; but for the purpose of making thy mind all the 
firmer, I had asked thee in this wise ; so that thy fame might 
greatly increase. I also know the righteous Rama with Siti 
and Lakshmana. This brother of thine at present stays at 
the mighty mountain Chitrakuta. On the morrow thou wilt 
set out for that reigon. Do thou to-day sojourn here along 
with thy counsellors. O wise one, do this at thy pleasure, 
O thou understanding interest and desire.” Thereat the 
gentle-looking and highly famous one said, “Be it so ; ” and 
the king’s son made up his mind to spend the night in the 
great hermitage (of the saint). 



SECTION L XXX XI . 



Then the ascetic asked Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi, when 
he had decided for staying there, to receive his hospitality. 
Thereat Bharata said, “Thou hast for certain done this, — 
(hast offered me) water for washing my feet, Arghya , and 
hospitality with what can be procured in the forest.” Then 
Bharadw&ja as if in jest, said unto Bharata, “I know thee to 
be of a complacent disposition ; and that thou art pleased 
with anything and everything. But I wish to feast thy forces. 
And, O best of men, it behoves thee to act in harmony with 
my desire. Why didst thou coming hither, leave thy army at 
a distance ? And, thou man of men, why didst thou not come 
accompanied with thy forces ? ” Bharata replied unto him, 
saying, “ I had not come accompanied with my forces, from 
fear of thee, O reverend Sir. O worshipful one, kings and 
their sons should always carefully avoid the regions of asce- 
tics. Choice steeds, men, and mad elephants of the best 
kind, covering a spacious tract of country, come in my train, 
respected Sir. That these might not injure trees or water or 
the grounds of the cottages partaining to the asylums, have 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYA KA NBA M. 



43 * 



I come hither alone.” “Bring the forces here,” — thus desired 
by the mighty ascetic, Bharata accordingly caused the troops 
to be brought in. 

Then entering the chamber of the sacrificial fire, (Bhara- 
dwSja) having sipped water and rubbed his lips therewith, 
invoked Vi9wakarm& for the purpose of entertaining his guest. 
“I invoke V^wakarmH ; even Twastri himself. I wish to 
entertain guests. Let him accomplish this for me. I invoke 
the three guardians of the worlds — gods headed by Sakra. 
I wish to entertain guests. Let them accomplish this for me. 
Let those rivers that flow westwards, and those that move 
tortuously on the earth and in the sky, come hither in a body. 
And let others run Maireya , and othersrefined wine, and 
others again cool waters resembling the juice of the sugar- 
cane. I invoke the celestials and the Gandharbas and 
Vi^wiva^u and Hah& and Huhu and also the divine Apsar&s 
and Gandharbis all ; and Ghritechi, Vi9w2Lchi, Mi^rake^i and 
Alamvusha ; and N 2 gadatt& and Hem& and Som& residing in 
the mountain ; and those ladies that attend Sakra, and those 
that attend BrahmS. I invoke ail these females well attired, 
in company with Tumvuru. And let that beautiful forest of 
Kuvera in the north Kuru, having its foliage resembling 
attires and ornaments, and its fruits debonair damsels, exist 
even at this very spot. And here let the worshipful Som& 
yeild me excellent viands of diverse kinds in plenty ; things 
that may be eaten or enjoyed, sucked or licked ; and varie- 
gated blossoms growing in the trees, and wines and (other) 
drinks, and meats of various kinds.” Thus, furnished 
with unrivalled ascetic energy, did that anchoret observ- 
ing excellent vows, express himself orthoepically in 
consonance with Siksh£. And as he sat with joined 
hands facing the west with a rapt mind, there came 
separately all those deities. And then touching Malaya 
and Dardura, and laden (with perfumes), a delicious and 
welcome wind began to blow delightfully, removing sweat. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




43 * 



RAM AY AN A. 



And the clouds poured down a pleasant shower of bios* 
soms ; and from all sides were heard sounds of celestial 
kettle-drums. And a rare breeze set in, and the multitudes 
of Apsar&s danced ; and the celestials and the Gandharbas 
sang, and the Vinas let out their notes. And the dulcet 
sounds high and low furnished with Santa and measure, 
entered the Earth and the firmanent and the ears of all crea- 
tures. When that celestial symphony, delightful unto the 
ears of men, had thus developed itself, Bharata’s forces saw 
the workmanship of ViswakarmS. That spot widening into 
a level plain measuring five Yoyanas was covered with thick 
grass resembling blue lapises. And on it stood Vt'lwas, 
and Kapithwas , Panasas , citrons, and Amalakas t and mangos, 
embellished with fruits. From the north Kuro had spread 
a wood capable of conferring every enjoyment ; and a beauti- 
ful river coursed through bordered by many a tree. And 
there had arisen white edifices having four divisions ; and 
stables for horses and elephants ; and grand gateways belong- 
ing unto palaces and mansions ; and royal residences with 
graceful gates, resembling white clouds, bearing white gar- 
lands and washed with fragrant waters, having four corners, 
and spacious, fitted up with beds, seats, and vehicles, having 
every kind of excellent sapid food, stocked with excellent 
edibles and apparels, having every variety of food, possessing 
washed and bright vessels, with every description of seats, 
graceful, and accommodated with choice beds with coverlets. 
Permitted by the Maharshi, Kaikeyi’s son, Bharata, entered 
that mansion abounding in gems. And he was followed by 
the counsellors and the priests ; and the latter beholding the 
arrangements of the palace, were filled with delight And 
Bharata in company with the counsellors there went round 
the august royal seat, the chowri t and the umbrella, worthy 
of a king. And having bowed down unto R£ma, he worship 
ped that seat. And then holding the chowri of hair, he sat 
down on the seat of a minister. Then the counsellors and 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODRYA KA NDAM. 



433 



priests seated themselves according to rank. And there- 
after the general and the protector of the encampment (got 
themselves seated). Then at BharadwSja's command, came 
into being near Bharata streams having payaca for their 
slime. And at the pleasure of the BrShmana, on both their 
banks arose charming dwellings, covered with pale clay. And 
at that very moment there came twenty thousand women 
commissioned by Brahmi, adorned writh divine ornaments. 
And there came also twenty thousand females sent by Kuvera, 
decked out in gold and gems, pearls and corals. The sight 
of these was capable of filling men's minds with enchanting 
ravishment. And there came from Nandana twenty thousand 
damsels ; and N£rada and Tumvuru and Gopa, resembling 
the sun in splendour. The Gandharba kings began to sing 
before Bharata. And AlamvushS, and Mi^rakesi, and Pun- 
darikl, and V&man£ danced before Bharata, at the command 
of Bharadw£ja. And those blossoms that are in the celestial 
regions, and that bloom in the forest of Chaitraratha, became 
visible in Pray&ga at the energy of BharadwSja. And Vilwas 
did the office of players on the Mridanga, and Vibhitakas, 
that of keepers of Soma, and A$waththas became .dancers, at 
the energy of BharadwSja. And Saralas, TSlas, Tilakas, and 
Tam21as, being delighted, became hump-backed ones and 
dwarfs. And Sinsapas, Amalakis, Jamvus and other plants 
of the forest, wearing the forms of females, stood at the man- 
sion of Bharadw&ja. “Let wine-drinkers drink wine, the 
hungry eat P&ya^a, and those that are inclined to it, feed on 
clean meat.” And every seven or eight females taking a 
man, bathed him on the lovely banks of the riVers. And 
damsels furnished with expansive eyes, having wiped the 
persons (of the bathers), pressed their legs, and those magni- 
ficent women made them drink (wine). And the keepers 
duly fed excellent horses, elephants, camels and Suravi's sons 
(oxen), writh their (proper) food. And some persons possessed 
of mighty strength, being directed thereto, fed the bearers 
55 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




434 



RAMArANA. 



of the foremost ikshw&ku warriors with suger-canes, honey, 
and fried paddy. And the groom forgot hi9 horse, and the 
elephant-keeper his elephant ; that army there became trans- 
ported with wine and exhilaration. And snmptuously enter- 
tained with every enjoyment, with their bodies decked with 
red sandal, the soldiery in the company of bevies of Apsar^s, 
exclaimed, “To Ayodhyi. will we not go, nor yet to Dandaka. 
Peace be unto Bharata, and may Rftma reap happiness V 0 
Thus did footmen and the riders and keepers of elephants 
and horses, as well as others, having experienced such a state, 
utter words. And men by thousands, exceedingly delighted, 
sent up shouts. And saying, <f This is heaven,” the retinae 
of Bharata — the soldiers — began to dance and laugh and 
sing; and bearing garlands, they on all sides rushed by 
thousands. And beholding the inviting viands resembling 
ambrosia, they, although already fed, became desirous of 
eating once again. And wearing new clothes, all the servants, 
and maids, and females of the household, became exceedingly 
well pleased. And elephants, and asse9, camels, kine and 
horses, and beasts and birds, being fed their fill, did not 
hunger after anything eUe. And there appeared no one who 
wore a soiled habit, or who was hungry, or melancholy, or 
whose hair was covered with dust. And the people with 
wonder beheld before them vessels of precious metals by 
thousands graced with chaplets of flowers, filled with essences 
of fruits and fragrant soups and curries and the flesh of goats 
and bears, and white rice. And there were on the skirts of the 
wood wells having P&ya^a for their slime ; and the kine 
y elided whatever was asked ; and all the trees dropped honey. 
And the tanks were fitted with Maireya as well as with dean 
hot meat of deer, peacocks, and cocks, dressed in pans. And 
there were rice -holders by thousands, and curry-pots by 
hundred thousands, and golden vessels by Arvudas . And 
there were pitchers and water-pots and cleaned vessels for 
churning curd, filled with the same. And there were tanka 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A FODHYA KA NDA M 



435 



of savoury and yellow butter-milk, well-tempered. And 
there were tanks filled with Rasdla ;* and others filled with 
milk, and with sugar. And men saw sediments, acrid powders 
and various others things in vessels, for the purpose of bath, 
on the terraces of tanks ; and tooth-cleaning sticks of Ancumfin 
and other (trees) ; and white sandal paste lying before ; and 
cleaned mirrors ; apd lots of cloths ; and sandals ; and shoes 
in pairs by thousands ; and collyrium-pots ; and combs ; and 
brushes ; and bows at some places ; and mail j and various 
kinds of seats and beds. And they saw reservoirs for asses, 
camels, elephants, and horses, with easy descents, filled with 
water to assist their digestion ; and pools furnished with 
lotuses, of the hue of the firmament, with transparent water, 
comfortable for ablutions ; and tender (plots of) grass all 
around colored like blue lapises, to serve as pasture for beasts. 
Witnessing the wonderful hospitality provided by the Mahar- 
shi Bbaradw&ja, like unto a vision, the men marvelled. 
Thus entertained like unto celestials in Nandana, they passed 
the night at the hermitage of Bharadwija. Then taking the 
permission of Bharadwfija, all the Gandharbas as well as 
the superb damsels went away as they had come. And the 
men remained intoxicated and highly inebriate with the 
liquor, their persons daubed with goodly aguru and sandal ; 
and the various elegant garlands beautiful to behold, lay by 
themselves all around, crushed by the people. 



SECTION LX XXXI I . 

Having passed that night, Bharata having been enter- 
tained along with his family, appeared before Bharadw&ja, 
desirous (of seeing R&ma). Seeing that foremost of men 
(standing) with joined hands, Bharadw&ja, who had just finish- 
* A preparation of batter-milk. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




43 6 



RAMAVANA. 



ed his fire-sacrifice, said, “Hast thou passed the night 
pleasantly at our place ? And have all thy men been pleased 
with our hospitality ? Do thou tell me this, O sinless on c.” 
Thereupon, Bharata bowing down, with joined hands said 
unto that ascetic of excellent energy, as he had issued 
out of his hermitage, “O reverend Sire, I along with all 
x my forces and vehicles have passed (the night) happily. I 
have been full well entertained by thee, O worshipful one 
possessed of power. And with our languor and heat 
removed, we all sumptuously feasted and comfortably quar- 
tered, have passed (the night) agreeably along with our 
servants. Now, O best of ascetics, I beseech thee to look 
with a propitious eye on me who am bound for my brother's 
place. And tell me, O thou cognizant of mo'rality, how far 
is it unto that high-souled righteous one's asylum, and by 
what way (shall I reach there) ?” When Bharata eager to see 
his brother had asked thus, the highly energetic Bharadwija 
of rigid austerities answered, “O Bharata, two and a half 
Yojanas hence, embosomed in a tenantless wood is the 
mountain Chitrakuta, charming with rocks and woods. On 
its northern border flows the river Mand&kini, covered 
with flowering trees and with blossoming woods. Beyond 
the stream is the mountain Chitrakuta. There is their 
thatched cottage, my child ; there they abide for certain. 
Proceeding by the southern way, do thou with thy forces 
composed of elephants and horses, O master of the army, 
turn to the left, O exalted one, and go southwards. By 
doing so, thou wilt be able to see R&ghava.” Hearing of 
their departure, the wives of that king of kings, leaving 
their cars, albeit worthy of them, gathered round the Brih- 
mana. Lean and trembling and in woful guise, Kau^alyi 
along with the noble Sumitri, with her hands took the feet 
of the ascetic. Despised universally because of her unright- 
eous desire, Kaikeyi also bashfully took hold of his feet, 
and, having circumambulated the mighty and venerable 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




AYODHYAKANDAM . 



437 



anchoret* stood near Bharata in dejection of spirits. Then 
the mighty ascetic Bharadw&ja asked Bharata, “O descendant 
of Ragbu, I wish to know particularly about thy mothers.” 
Thus accosted by Bharadw&ja, the pious Bharata deft 
in speech said with joined hands, ”0 reverend sir, she 
whom thou beholdest depressed and emaciated through grief 
and fasting— resembling a very goddess — is the noble Queen 
of my father. This one, Kau£aly&, it is that gave birth unto 
that chief of men, having the powerful gait of a lion, R&ma, 
even as Aditi gave birth to Dh&t&. She that stands at her 
left hand, in dejected guise, is the noble Sumitr& afflicted 
with sorrow, the second wife of the monarch — like a 
Karnik&ra bough in a forest, with all its blossoms shrivelled 
up. The sons of this exalted lady are the youthful and 
heroic Lakshmana and Satrughna, having truth for their 
prowess, and resembling celestials in shape. And her in 
consequence of whose act those foremost of men have come 
by crushing misfortune, and the king Da^aratha hath gone to 
heaven, deprived of his son, — wrathful and proud of her good 
fortune, setting her heart on wealth — Kaikeyi, dishonorable, 
although endowed with the 1 semblance of honor, do thou 
know this wicked one intent on sin as my mother. In her 
do I perceive the root of my mighty misfortune.” Having 
said this, with his words choked with emotion, that best of 
men with his eyes reddened, sighed like an enraged serpent. 
As Bharata was speaking thus, the great ascetic Bharadw&ja 
gifted with high understanding and knowing interest, 
answered Bharata, saying, “O Bharata, thou ought not to 
cast any blame on Kaikeyi. This banishment of the king 
(R&ma), shall be for the good (of all). The banishment of 
R&ma shall surely be for the welfare of the gods and the 
Asuras and sages of concentrated souls.” Thus blest, 
Bharata saluted the ascetic and went round him, and then sum- 
moning the soldiery, said, “Yoke." Thereupon, getting ready 
excellent steeds and cars decked with gold, many people 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




43 » 



RAM AY AN A. 



mounted, » with the intention of departing. And male and 
female elephants^ with golden chains round their necks, and 
furnished with banners, with the sounds (of bells), proceeded, 
like clouds at the end of the summer season. And then proceed - 
ed various kinds of cars great and light of movement and 
of high value ; and the infantry went on foot And on a 
magnificent car went the ladies beaded by Kau£aly&, with 
delighted hearts, eager to see Righava. And ascending an 
elegant car resembling the infant sun or moon, driven by 
charioteers, went the graceful Bhafata well attired. And 
that mighty host abounding with horses and elephants 
proceeded, blocking up the southern quarter,, like a colossal 
cloud arisen (in the sky), leaving behind on the other 
bank of the Gang* woods inhabited by birds and beasts, 
and coursing by rivers and, mountains. And composed of 
numbers of elephants and horses in high spirits, that army 
of Bharata, frightening multitudes of beasts and birds, dived 
into that mighty forest 



SECTION Lxxxxrrr. 



Afflicted by the mighty force on its way with banners 
(displayed), those inhabitants of the woods, leaders of 
elephant-herds, took to their heels in company with the 
herds themselves. And bears and Prishatas and Rums 
were on all sides seen in the forest-ways, and on hills and 
rivers. And that virtuous son of Da$aratha with a glad 
heart held on his way, surrounded by that vast army con- 
sisting of fourfold forces, raising a tremendous upoar. And 
that army of the high-souled Bharata resembling the waves 
of the ocean, covered the earth quite, as clouds m the rainy 
season cover the welkin. And filled with steeds and mighty 
elephants, the earth at that time for a long while remained 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYAKANDAM, 



439 



invisible. And having proceeded a long way, the graceful 
Bharata, with his bearers extremely tired, said these words 
unto that foremost of counsellors, Vasishtha, “From appear- 
ances, and from what I had heard, it is evident that we have 
arrived at that region which BharadwSja had told us of. 
This is the mountain Chitrakuta and that the river Mand&kini. 
And from a distance this forest apppeareth like dark clouds. 
And now our elephants resembling hills afflict the romantic 
sides of Chitrakuta. And the trees scatter blossoms over the 
sides of the mountain, even as after summer sable clouds pour 
down showers. O Satrughna, behold the realms inhabited 
by Kinnaras, scattered with steeds, like the main with maka - 
ras . And these herds of deer furnished with celerity, being 
urged on, roam about like masses of clouds in the sky in 
autumn, propelled by the winds. And like the people of the 
south, these warriors bearing shields resembling clouds, are 
adorning their heads with ornaments of perfumed blossoms. 
And this forest, although void of men and dreadful in appear- 
ance, at present appeareth unto me like AyodhylL teeming 
with people. The dust raised by the hoofs (of horses) stands 
covering the sky : anon the wind bearing it away, compasses 
my pleasure. And, O Satrughna, see how fast these cars 
yoked with steeds and driven by skilful charioteers, are 
proceeding in the forsst. And behold these beauteous 
peacocks, which, being frightened, take refuge in the mountain 
— the home of feathered tribes. This country appears to me 
exceedingly lovely. This abode of the ascetics is like 
unto the way to heaven itself. Male and female deer and 
Prishatas in the forest, beautiful to look at, appear as if 
variegated with flowers. Now let the soldiers go advisedly 
and search this forest, so that they light upon those chiefs 
of men, Rlma and Lakshmana.” Hearing Bharata’s speech, 
persons with weapons in their hands, plunged into the 
forest, and those heroes presently discovered the top of a 
(column of) smoke. Having seen the top of the (column of) 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




440 



RAM AT AN A. 



smoke, they came before Bharata and said, “Fire cannot 
exist where there is no man present. Therefore it is evident 
that even here are those descendants of Raghu. But if thos ? 
foremost of men, those subduers of their enemies, the 
princes, be not here, there are others, being ascetics, resem- 
bling RSma.” Hearing their words acceptable unto the 
pious, that afflicter of hostile ranks, Bharata, said unto the 
entire army, “Do ye carefully stay here : do not proceed 
further. I myself will go, and Sumantra and Dhriti. M Thus 
desired, the troops remained all about that place. Bharata 
went away, keeping his gaze fixed in the direction of the 
top of (the column of) smoke. Desired by Bharata to halt, 
that army, looking in the direction of the smoke, rejoiced 
soon on learning that the beloved R&ma had arrived (at that 
place). 



SECTION lxxxxiv. 



TT aving spent a long time in that mountain, that lover 
of hills and woods, Da£ar&tha's son resembling an immortal, 
anxious to pleasure Vaidehi as well as to please his own 
mind, showed the variegated Chitrakuta unto his wife, like 
Purandara unto Sachi. “O gentle one, neither deprivation 
of the kingdom nor separation from friends afflicts my mind 
on beholding this romantic mountain. My gentle one, look 
but at the hill abounding with flocks of various birds, adorned 
with summits cleaving the welkin and teeming with mineral 
substances. And some parts of this monarch of mountains 
are like silver, and some are blood-red, and some yellow like 
the hue of Manjisth&, and some lustrous like sapphires, and 
some shining like blossoms or crystal or Ketakas , and some 
blazing like stars or mercury, and some dight in mineral 
substances. And the mountain shines, being filled with divers 



Digitized by 



Google 




A YODHYAKANDAM . 



44i 



beasts and multitudes of innocuous tigers, hyenas and bears, 
and thronged with innumerable birds. And overspread with 
mangos, rose-apples, and Asanas , and Lodhras,* Piyalas, 
jacks, Ankolas, and Bhavyatini$as, and Vilwas, and Tin- 
dukas, and bamboos, Ka^aris, Arishtas, and Varanas, and 
Madhukas, sesames, and jujubes, and Amalakas, Nipas, 
canes, Dhanwanas, and citrons — all in full flower, and bearing 
fruits, umbrageous and charming, — the mountain attains an 
accession of loveliness. And, thou gentle one, on the 
picturesque plateau of the hill behold these intelligent couples 
of Kinnaras engaged in sport at spots yeilding every enjoy- 
ment ; and look at their swords hung up on the boughs. And 
see the gorgeous apparel of Vidy&dharis, as well as the 
charming regions in which they sport And like an elephant 
dropping the temporal juice, this hill appeareth beautiful with 
cascades, fountains and rillets, flowing here and there. Whom 
doth not the breeze laden with the perfumes of many a 
flower, soothing the sense of smell, fill with delight ? If, O 
blameless one, I dwell (here) for many years with thee as well 
as Lakshmana, grief cannot overcome me. O damsel, I take 
delight in this picturesque peak abounding in flowers and 
fruits, and frequented by various birds. By this banishment 
of mine, I have gained two things — my father has maintained 
his truth in religion, and Bharata has obtained his dear 
interest. O daughter of Videha, art thou being pleased on 
viewing along with me on Chitrakuta, various objects grateful 
unto mind, speech and body ? O queen, this abode in the 
forest like unto ambrosia hath heen declared by those royal 
saints, my ancestors, as working out one’s emancipation after 
death. The giant crags of the mountain grace the place all 
round by hundreds ; many and various-hued, blue and yellow 
and pale and red. In the night, the annual herbs by thous- 
ands growing on this foremost of hills, shine and become 
visible by their own lustre, like flames of fire. And, O lady, 

* SymplocQS r act mesa. — T. 

56 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




RAM A V ANA. 



44 * 

some parts of the mountain appear like dwellings, and some 
like gardens, and some, again, consist of single rocks (capable 
of accommodating numbers of men). And Chitrakuta looks 
as if it had arisen, riving th£ earth ; and the fair front of 
Chitrakuta can be perceived from every point. Behold 
the beds of pleasure-seekers, consisting of the petals of 
lotuses, with Sthagaras , Partagas and Bhuryapatras for 
their coverlets. And, my wife, behold these lotus-garlands 
have been crushed and scattered ; and the various fruits have 
been partaken of. The mountain Chitrakuta abounding in 
fruits and roots and waters, surpasses Kuvera’s capital or 
Sakra's city or the north Kurus. My wife, O SitS, if in con- 
sonance with my own excellent rules, I can, remaining in the 
path of the pious, pleasantly pass this time along with thyself 
and Lakshmana, then I shall attain the happiness resulting 
from observing the duties of one's race.” 



SECTION Lxxx-xv. 



Then going out of the mountain, the Lord of Ko^ala 
showed unto Mithili's daughter the charming stream MandS- 
kini of excellent waters. And R&ma, furnished with eyes 
resembling lotuses, addressed the daughter of king Videha, 
transcendentally beautiful, with a countenance like the fair 
moon, saying, “Behold the river Mandakini, having variegated 
islets \ beautiful ; frequented by ducks and cranes ; and filled 
with flowers ; covered with diverse trees bearing fruits and 
flowers ; and looking graceful all round like Sangandhiki her- 
self of Kuvera. And the waters rendered muddy in conse- 
quence of herds of deer drinking of them, as well as the 
graceful descents unto the river, fill me with pleasure. And, 
my beloved, sages wearing matted locks and deer-skins, with 



Digitized by CjOOQle 




A YODHVA KA ND A M. 



443 



barks for their sheets, are in season performing their ablutions 
in the river Mand&kini. And observing rules, persons raising 
up their arms, are worshipping the sun, and, O thou of expans- 
ive eyes, after these appear ascetics following vows, (engaged 
in Japa ). And the hill seems to dance on the wind swaying 
the tops of trees $ and on both sides of the river, the trees 
are crowned with flowers and leaves. And behold the river 
Mand&kini, somewhere with its waters resembling pearls, 
and somewhere with islets, and somewhere filled with 
persons who have attained emancipation. O thou of slender 
waist, behold these hosts of flowers spreading along, and 
others dipping themselves (in the stream). And, O auspici- 
ous one, behold these sweet-throated birds, the ChakravUkas, 
getting upon the islets, uttering pleasant notes. Methinks, 
O beauteous one, the sight of Chitrakuta and of Mand&kini 
is even more delightful than life in the metropolis, or the 
sight of thy own self. Do thou like unto her companion 
perform thy bath with me in this stream, whose 
waters are perpetually stirred by emancipated ones, 
furnished with asceticism, self-restraint, and control over 
the senses, who have had their sins removed. Do thou, 
O Sit 5, perform thy ablutions in the MandSkini, scattering at 
the sametime, O girl, red and white lotuses. Do thou, my 
wife, always consider the wild animals as citizens, the mount- 
ain as AyodhyS, and this stream as the Sarayu. The virtuous 
Lakshmana is ever obedient to my commands ; and, O 
Videha’s daughter, thou also art favourable to me. This 
causes delight in my heart. Bathing thrice (in this river), 
and living on tasteful fruits and roots, I in thy company do 
not today wish either for AyodhySL or royalty. Bathing in 
this beauteous stream agitated by herds of elephants, whose 
waters are drunk by elephants, lions and monkeys, — which is 
graced with flowers, and which is decked with multitudes of 
blossoms, there is no one who has not his fatigue removed, 
and who does not feel exhilarated.” Having thus along with 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




444 



RAMA YANA . 



his beloved one, spoken variously regarding the stream, that 
perpetuator of the Raghu race, Rama, began to range the 
charming Chitraktita, resembling the collyrium in hue. 



SECTION LX XXXVI. 



Having showed unto MithiUL's daughter the river belong- 
ing to the mountain, R&ma sat down on its table-land and, 
gratifying Siti with meat, said unto her, “This clean meat 
tastes sweet, having been roasted in fire.” The righteous 
R&ghava was thus seated in company with SiUl, when Bhara- 
ta’s followers came there. And filling the heavens, there 
arose clouds of dust raised by the army as well as an uproar. 
And at this time mad leaders of elephant-herds accompanied 
by the latter, scared by the terrible tumult, scudded on all 
sides. And RSLghava heard the noise raised by the army ; and 
also saw all those leaders of elephant-herds scampering away. 
And having seen them running away and heard that hubbub, 
R&ma spoke unto Sumitr&’s son, Lakshmana of flaming ener- 
gy, “Ha ! Lakshmana, in whom SumitrS has been blest with a 
worthy son, hark ; A tremendous and dreadful uproar 
resembling the' rumbling of cloulds is being heard ; and in 
the woods and mighty forest, deer and buffalos and herds of 
elephants being accompanied by lions are suddenly scamper- 
ing away in all directions. O Sumitr&'s son, it behoves 
thee to learn whether any king or prince is hunting in the 
forest, or any ferocious beast is (ravaging the woods). O 
Lakshmana, this mountain is even fncapable of being 
frequented by fowls. Therefore it behoves thee to learn all 
about it, as has actually been the case.” — Thereat, hurriedly 
ascending a flowering Sdla tree, Lakshmana surveying all 
sides, fixed his gaze on the east. And viewing the east, he 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A VODHTA KA NDA M. 



445 



discovered a mighty army, abounding with elephants, horses 
and cars, and consisting of equipped infantry. Thereupon, 
Lakshmana communicated unto Rama tidings concerning 
that army filled with elephants and steeds, and decked with 
cars and streamers ; and spoke unto RSima, saying, “ O noble 
one, do you put out the fire ; and let Sita go into the cave. 
And do you string your bow and make ready the arrows and 
don on your mail.” Thereat, Rama — chief of men — answered 
Lakshmana, saying, “O son of SumitrS, do thou (first) 
ascertain whom this host belongs to. 11 Thus accosted 
by Rama, Lakshmana, as if consuming that army by his 
wrath resembling fire, said, ‘ Having got himself installed, 
Kaikeyi* s son, Bharata, anxious to render his royalty perfectly 
safe, is coming hither for the purpose of slaying us both. 
Yonder is seen the graceful tree. By the same appeareth on 
the car the Kovid&ra standard, having a shining top. And 
men riding swift coursers are at their pleasure making for 
this place ; and elephant-riders, riding on elephants, are also 
cheerfully directing their course hither. Let us, O hero, taking 
oar bows, station ourselves on this hill. 1 will (to day) see 
Bharata, for whom we have come by this mighty misfortune. 
Or let us rather remain where we are accoutred in mail and 
with our arms ready. Shall he of the KovidSra banner in 
conflict come under our sway ? O hero, we have met with 
that foe of ours for whom, O R&ghava, you, SitiL and myself 
have (expirienced such misery), for whom, O Raghava, you 
have been cast off from the entire kingdom. Surely, Bharata 
should be slain by me. O RSLghava, fault find I none in 
slaying Bharata ; slaying a former wronger, one doth not 
reap unrighteousness. O RSghava, there is religious merit 
to be reaped by slaying Bharata, who had formerly done us 
wrong. On this one being slain, you will rule the entire 
earth. To day shall Kaikeyi lusting after the kingdom, with 
grief behold her son slain in battle by me, like a tree riven 
by an elephant. 1 will also kill Kaikeyi along (with the 



• Digitized by LjOOQle 




RAM AY AN A. 



446 

hump-backed one, and her friends. Let the earth today be 
freed from foul sins. To day will I, O bestower of honor t 
vent my restrained ire and bad blood upon the hostile hosts, 
like fire set to a heap of hay. To day with sharpened 
shafts will I cut the bodies of the hostile hosts and drench the 
woods of Chitrakuta with their blood. The ferocious beasts 
shall drag away elephants and steeds and men slaughtered by 
me with arrows penetrating into their hearts. I will, without 
doubt, in this forest pay the debt I owe to my bow and 
arrows, by slaying Bharata together with all his forces.” 



SECTION LxxxxVii. 

Pacifying Sumitra’s son, Lakshmana, transported with 
rage and eager for encounter, R&ma addressed him, saying, 
“When the mighty Bharata possessed of high spirits has 
himself come here, what is the use of the bow or the sword 
or the shield ? Having promised to maintain my father’s 
truth, what, O Lakshmana, shall I, having slain Bharata in 
battle, do with the kingdom with a stain attached unto it ? 
That thing which falls to my lot on the destruction of friends 
and adherents I never accept, even like food mixed with 
poison. I swear unto thee, I wish for the (possession of) righte- 
ousness, interest, desire and the earth, in your interests alone, 
O Lakshmana. O Lakshmana, I swear by my weapon that it 
is for the maintenance and happiness of my brothers that I 
wish for the kingdom. O mild one, this Earth herself is 
not difficult of being attained by me ; but, O Lakshmana, I 
do not through unrighteousness wish to possess myself of 
Sakra’s state. — May fire reduce to ashes any happiness of 
mine that, O bestower of honor, happens to be dissevered 
from Bharata, or thyself, or Satrughna. I think Bharata 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYA KA NDA M. 



447 



attached unto his brothers had come to Ayodhya ; and then, 
following the morality regulating the race, that one dearer 
unto me than life, hearing of me banished, bearing matted 
locks and bark, together with Janaki, O hero, and thyself, 
thou foremost of men, has, with his heart surcharged with 
affection, and his senses overwhelmed by grief, come hither 
for seeing us. He cannot have come on any other account. 
And having got wroth with Kaikeyi, and given her rough 
speech, that auspicious one, having gratified my sire, has come 
hither to make the kingdom over unto me. And the season 
being fit, meet it is that Bharata should see us. He does 
not even in thought act against us. Hath ere this Bharata 
done thee any bad turn ? Or did he tell thee any thing so 
alarming that today thou standest in fear of him ? Certainly 
thou ought not to say cruel or unpleasant words in relation 
to Bharata, — if wrong be done unto Bharata, I shall consider 
myself as wronged. Do sons, in times of peril, ever slay 
their father, or brothers their brother like unto their life, 

0 son of Sumitr& ? If thou speakest thus for the sake of 
the monarchy, on seeing Bharata, I will say unto him, ‘Make 
over the kingdom unto this one.’ Earnestly exhorted by me, 
saying, ‘Do thou place the kingdom in his hands’, — he 
will say, ‘Very weir.” 

Thus addressed by his brother of a virtuous disposition, 
Lakshmana ever engaged in Rama’s good, from shame 
seemed to enter into his body. And hearing those words, 
Lakshmana affected by shame, answered, “I conceive our 
father Da^aratha himself hath come to see you.” And finding 
Lakshmana overcome with shame, Rlghava replied, “I 
think that mighty-armed one has come hither to see us ; or 

1 take it for certain that, considering that we are fit for ease 
only, and taking our banishment to heart, he will take us 
home. Or it may be that graceful descendant of Raghu, my 
father, will go away, taking from the forest Videha’s daughter 
brought up in the lap of luxury. There are seen these grace- 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




443 



RAMAFANA. 



ful and well-bred steeds, courageous, swift, and furnished 
with the speed of the wind — the best of horses. And this 
huge elephant belonging to our aged sire, named Satrunjaya, 
proceedeth in the van of the army. But, thou exalted one, 
I do not see the splendid white umbrella of our father known 
among men. Therefore, doubts arise in my mind. Do thou 
descend from the top of the tree, O Lakshmana. Do my 
bidding.” Thus did the righteous R&ma accost Sumitri's 
son. Descending from the top of the Sdla tree, that conquerer 
in battles, Lakshmana, stood by R&ma with joined hands. 
Commanded by Bharata, “Let not (R&ma’s asylum) be tram- 
pled by the forces,” the army took up its quarters at a distance 
from the hill. And the Ikshw&ku host filled with elephants 
and steeds covering half a Yojana, encamped at the side of 
the mountain. And keeping morality in their fore-front, 
and renouncing pride, the disciplined forces schooled by 
Bharata in view of pleasing that descendant of Raghu 
(R&ma\ stayed in Chitrakuta. 



SECTION lxxxx vin. 



Having stationed his troops, that best of men, the 
master, became anxious to go on foot to the K&kutstha honor- 
ing his superiors. And the forces having with humility took 
up the quarters assigned, Bharata addressed his brother, 
Satrughna, saying, “O mild one, it- behoves thee at once to 
search this forest all round in company with a large body of 
men as well as these Nish&das. And let Guha himself ac- 
companied by a thousand of his kindred bearing in their 
hands arrows and bows and scimitars, also search for the 
K&kutstha in this forest. Accompanied by counsellors, citi- 
zens, preceptors and twice-born ones, I will on foot range 
every direction. So long as I do not see R&ma, or the mighty 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




A YODHYA KA NDA Af. 



449 



Lakshmana, or the highly exalted daughter of Videha, I shall 
not attain peace of mind. And so long as I do not see that 
face of his fair as the moon, with eyes expansive like lotuses, 
I shall not attain peace of mind. Surely, Sumitr&’s son, 
Lakshmana, who beholds R&ma’s countenance like the stain* 
less moon, with eyes resembling lotuses, and beaming in 
effulgence, is blessed. So long as I do not take on my head 
those feet of my brother bearing royal marks, I shall not 
attain peace of mind. So long as established in the king* 
dom of his father and grandfather, that one worthy of the 
monarchy is not sprinkled with the water of installation, 
1 shall not attain peace of mind. Blessed is Vaidehi, the 
eminently virtuous daughter of Janaka, who followeth the 
lord of'.this Earth bounded by the seas. And this Chitrakuta 
is fortunate — this hill like unto the monarch of mountains— 
in which resides K&kutstha, like Kuvera in Nandana. And 
blessed is this deep forest inhabited by ferocious animals, 
where abideth the great king RAma, the foremost of those 
bearing arms." Having said this, that best of men, the 
mighty-armed and highly energetic Bharata, on foot entered 
the vast forest. And that best of speakers went over the 
mountain-side through ranks of blossoming trees. Then 
swiftly ascending a Sala on Chitrakuta, he descried the high 
column of smoke belonging unto R&ma’s asylum. Having 
seen this, like one that has crossed over the ocean, the grace- 
ful Bharata, concluding that R&ma was there, rejoiced 
exceedingly along with his friends. Having heard that 
R&ma’s asylum containing pious people lay in Chitrakuta, that 
high-souled one again stationing his forces, speedily went (in 
that direction), accompanied by Guha. 



57 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




450 



RAMA YANA. 



SECTION LXXXXIX. 

• — a. a ^ 

Having quartered his forces, Bharata eager (to go to 
Rama’s place), went to see his brother, showing unto 
Satrughna the signs of Rama’s abode being in the vicinity. 
And having desired Vasistha, saying, “Bring my mothers 
without delay,” that one attached to his superiors went 
before. And eager to see Rama even like Bharata himself, 
Sumantra followed Bharata at a short distance. And as 
Bharata passed on, he observed a neat cottage of leaves 
stationed among the asylums of anchorets, furnished with 
a portion having a wall with a door. And before the cottage, 
Bharata saw fuel broken up, and flowers gathered. And 
he saw at places signs of Ku$a and bark set up on trees when 
R&ma and Lakshmana (first) arrived at their asylum. And in 
that habitation, Bharata saw great heaps of dry dung of deer 
and buffalos, gathered for preventing cold. As he proceeded, 
the intelligent and mighty-armed Bharata with a cheerful 
heart remarked* unto Satrughna and all the courtiers, “I 
conceive, we have reached the tract that was mentioned by 
Bharadwija. Hard by this spot, I fancy, is the river Mandi- 
kini. On high are barks set up by Lakshmana. Having to 
pass by the way at unusual hours, (Lakshmana) has marked 
it with signs. On the side of the hill is the way by which 
long-tusked elephants pass to and fro with vehemence, 
roaring at each other. Here is seen the dense and dark 
smoke of that which the anchorets are ever anxious to 
preserve in the forest — fire. Even here shall I with a 
delighted heart see that foremost of men, the noble RAghava 
resembling a Maharshi, ever engaged in serving his supe- 
riors.” Then going to Chitrakuta, that descendant of Ragbu, 
coming to the Mandakini, said unto the men, “That fore- 
most of men in all the world, the lord of all, coming into 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A VODHT A KA NDA M. 



45 * 



seclusion, is in his yoga posture. 0 fie upon my birth 
and my life ! For me, having come by misfortune, and 
renounced every comfort, the effulgent lord of men, 
R&ghava, is dwelling in the woods. I shall be taxed 
of men on the score. To-day (first) pacifying him, I will fall 
at the feet of R§ma as well as of Siti and Lakshmana.” 
Having thus bewailed, Da^aratha’s son saw a splendid, charm- 
ing, and holy dwelling in that forest, composed of leaves. 
And Bharata beheld in RSma’s habitation a sacred structure 
made of leaves, covered with a profusion of Sdla t palm, and 
A^wakarna leaves ; spread with soft Ku^a, like a dais in a 
sacrifice ; adorned with bows resembling the iris, plaited on 
the back with gold, of mighty force, and capable of achieving 
arduous feets and destroying foes ; and garnished with arrows 
in quivers, seeming like the rays of the sun, with flaming 
mouths, — like unto the Bhogavati with serpents ; and exceed- 
ingly beautified with golden sheaths and scimitars and 
shields spangled with gold and nice guana finger-fences deck- 
ed with gold ; inaccessible unto foes like a lions’s den unto 
deer ; and furnished with a spacious dais inclined on the 
north-east, with a fire flaming on it. And looking around, 
anon Bharata saw his superior R£ma seated in the cottage 
bearing a head of matted locks, clad in a black deer-skin, and 
having tattered cloth and bark for his garment. And he saw 
R&ma seated like unto a flame — with leonine shoulders, mighty 
arms, and eyes resembling lotuses — the righteous lord of this 
world bounded by the seas — saw the mighty-armed one like 
unto the eternal Brahm&, seated on a skin-seat on the ground 
along with Sit£ and Lakshmana. And seeing him, overwhelm- 
ed with grief and affliction, the righteous and graceful son of 
Kaikeyi, Bharata, rushed (towards him). And soon as Bharata 
saw R&ma, he, exceedingly distressed, broke out into lamenta- 
tions in words choked with sorrow. And incapable of holding 
himself in patience, he said, “That elder brother of mine, 
who (seated) in court should be surrounded by the subjects 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




452 



RAM A YANA. 



intent upon paying him homage, is now surrounded by wild 
deer. He that used to adorn his person with attire worth 
many thousands (of things), engaged in observing morality, 
is clad in deer-skin. Why doth he that always wore varie- 
gated blossoms, RSghava, beareth this burthen of matted 
locks ? He who is worthy of acquiring religious merit by 
celebrating sacrifices according to the ordinance, is now 
following morality by afflicting his person. How is the person 
of that one whose body used to be daubed with costly sandal, 
covered with dust ? It is for me that Rama, although deserv- 
ing of comfort, has come by this misfortune. Wicked that I 
am, fie upon my life despised of men !” Thus lamenting in 
woful guise, with the lotus of his countenance covered with 
sweat, Bharata coming at Rama’s feet, fell at them bewail- 
ing. And inflamed with grief, the exceedingly powerful 
prince Bharata, having in distress of spirit uttered, “O noble 
one," again said nothing. And beholding the illustrious 
Rama, Bharata with his utterance choked with emotion, 
exclaimed, “O noble one,” and was unable to say anything 
further. Then Satrughna also weeping paid homage unto 
the feet of Rama. And shedding tears, Rama embraced them 
both. Then as in the sky, the Sun and the Moon meet with 
Sukra and Vrihashpati, those two princes (Rama and Laksh- 
mana) met with Sumantra and Guha in the forest. And 
beholding those kings resembling leaders of elephant -herds 
met together in that mighty forest, the dwellers in the woods, 
resigning their cheerfulness, began to shed tears. 



8ECTI0N C. 



Then Rlma cast his eyes on (Bharata) as clad in bark 
and wearing matted locks he lay on the earth with joined 
hands, incapable of being gazed at, like the Sun at the time 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A VODH V A K A ND A M. 



453 



of the universal dissolution. Then recognizing him a little, 
he took by the hand his brother Bharata, lean, with a pallid 
countenance. And smelling the crown of his head, and 
embracing that descendant of Raghu, R&ma took Bharata on 
his lap and asked him affectionately, “Where was thy father, 
child, that thou hast come to the forest ? It certainly behoves 
thee not to come unto the forest while he is living. Ah ! I 
see thee come from far after a long time. Why, my child, 
hast thou come unto this gloomy forest ? Is the king 
alive, my child, seeing that thou hast come hither j or, afficted 
with grief, hath he suddenly gone to the other world ? And, 
O mild one, child that thou art, thy kingdom ever thine 
hath not been wrested from thee ? And, O thou having 
truth for prowess, dost thou, my child, minister unto our 
sire ? And is that truthful one, that performer of R&jasuya 
and Acwamedha, ever devoted to righteousness, king 
Da^aratha, well t And, my child, is that exceedingly efful- 
gent and learned Br&hmana ever steady in morality, the 
priest of the Ikshwikus, duly honored ? And, my child, axe 
Kau£aly2, and Sumitri having a son, in happiness ? And is 
the noble Kaikeyi in spirits ? And is that one, sprung from 
a mighty line, humble and versed in various lore, thy priest, 
who performeth every ceremony, who beareth no ill will, and 
whose gaze is ever fixed upon our welfare, — honored ? And 
do intelligent and sincere people cognizant of the rules, look 
after the sacrificial fire ? And do they regularly inform 
thee of the proper seasons for performing the fire-sacrifice ? 
A dost thou regard the deities, the ancestral manes, the 
preceptors like unto predecessors, the physicians, the BrSh- 
manas, and the servants? And dost not disregard the 
preceptor Sudhanwt versed in excellent arms whether in- 
spired with mantras or not, and accomplished in the know- 
ledge of polity ? And, my child, hast thou employed as thy 
concillors, persons, heroic, learned, self-controlled, well-born, 
and understanding signs, who are like thy own self ? O 



Digitized by 



Google 




454 



ramavana . 



descendant of Raghu, counsel well kept by clever councillors 
versed in lore, is the root of victory with kings. And thou 
hast not come under the sway of sleep ? And thou awakest 
at the proper hour ? And dost thou during the short hours 
revolve the means of acquiring wealth ? And thou dost not 
take counsel either with thyself alone, or (on the other hand) 
with a multiplicity of counsellors ? And thy counsel doth 
not range the kingdom (i. e. doth not take air) ? And, 
O descendant of Raghu, having determined upon a course 
costing small effort but fraught with a mighty result, thou 
setst about it sharply and delayest not ? And do the 
(auxiliary) kings know only those acts of thine that have 
been accomplished or those that are well nigh so, and not 
those that thou intendest to set thine hand to ? And do 
others through inference or appearances come at a know- 
ledge of thy counsels, although undivulged to others by thyself 
or thy counsellors ; and (do thou and thy ministers) attain 
to a knowledge of others' counsels ? And passing by a 
thousand dunces, dost thou set thy heart on having a single 
wise man ? In times of pecuniary stress, a wise man stands 
in excellent stead. And although a king might be surrounded 
by a thousand or ten thousand fools, yet he can count upon 
no assistance (at their hands). And a single able counsellor, 
intelligent, heroic, and sagacious, bringeth great prosperity 
upon a king or a prince. And, my child, dost thou emply the 
best servants upon the best offices, the mid d l in g u p o n 
middling, and the worst upon the worst ? And dost thou 
employ upon the most worthy offices counsellors who are 
above bribery, who have served thy father and grand-fatber, 
and who are pure ? And do the subjects visited with 
condign punishment, as well as the ministers, disregard thee, 
O son of Kaikeyi? And do the priests scorn thee like a 
fallen one, even as females do those lascivious folks who 
use force towards the former ? He that doth not slay a 
physician skilled in ways and a servant given to 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODHYA K AND AM. 



455 



enlisting the sympathies of his fellow-servants against his 
master, or a hero that covets riches, is slain (by them). And 
hast thou chosen for thy general one that is confident, 
is endowed with intelligence and fortitude, sprung in 
a respectable race, and attached and able ? And dost 
thou practically honor thy foremost warriors possessed 
of prowess, who have already given evidence of their 
manliness ? And dost thou at the proper time grant thy 
soldiers what thou shouldst — provision and pay ; and dost not 
delay^in doing this ? If the proper time for granting provision 
and pay be passed, the servants get wroth with their master 
and tax him ; and great is the evil that springs herefrom. 
And are the principal descendants of our race attached unto 
thee ; and are they, when enlisted on thy side with concen- 
trated minds, ready to lay down their lives ? And, O Bha- 
rata, are thy spies persons coming from the provinces, and 
learned, upright, endowed with presence of mind, represent- 
ing the truth, and possessed of wisdom ? And dost thou 
acquire intelligence of the expedients, eighteen* in respect 
of others, and fifteen in respect of thy own self, — by means 
of every three spies appointed in connection with each 
of these expedients — men quite ignorant of each other’s 
counsels ? And dost thou not contemn those weak ones 
that, O destroyer of thy foes, having been expelled, have come 
again (unto thee) ? And, my child, thou dost not minister unto 
atheistical Br&hmanas ? These childish persons proud of their 
learning are only fit for bringing evils upon others. While 
there are excellent scriptures, these people of subtle in- 
tellects, having acquired a knowledge of dialectics, speak 
tL , 

• I Minister. 2 Priest. 3 Heir-apparent. 4 General. 5 Warder. 6 Gate- 
keeper of the inner-apartment. 7 Jailor. 8 Treasurer. 9 Conveyer of the 
royal orders. 10 Pleaders. 11 Judges. 12 Members of the council. 13 Dis- 
tributer of pay and provision to the army. 14 Journeymen. 15 Justice of the 
peace. 16 Protector of the frontiers of the kingdom. 17 Magistrate. 
18 Guards of rivers, hills, forests, and fortresses. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




45 $ 



RAMA YANA. 



vanities. And, my child, dost thou protect the prosperous 
and renowned AyodhyS, inhabited formerly by our heroic 
predecessors ; bearing a true name ; having strong gates ; filled 
with elephants, steeds, and cars ; thronged by thousands ; with 
noble BrShmanas, Kshatriyas and Vai^yas breathing high 
spirits, and with their senses controlled, each engaged in his 
own task ; abounding in people learned in the Veda ; and 
surrounded with palatial mansions of various shapes ? And, 
O descendant of Raghu, are the flourishing provinces marked 
with hundreds of Chaityas, filled with prosperous people, 
graced with abodes of deities, places for distributing water, 
and tanks, with men and women in happy mood, gay with 
meetings and festivities, having their outskirts well furrowed, 
provided with beasts, void of ill feelings, depending on tanks 
for their water supply, charming, renounced by fierce animals, 
free from all kinds of fear, decked with mines, left by un- 
righteous people, and well governed by my predecessors,— 
having a good time of it ? And do agriculturists and cow- 
herds find favor in thy sight ? And remaining in their 
respective vocations, do they enjoy happiness ? And dost 
thou maintain them by securing unto them what they wish for 
and removing from them what they wish away ? All the 
dwellers in his dominions should be protected by the king. 
And dost thou conciliate the females ; and are they well 
protected by thee ? And dost thou not regard them ; and 
dost thou not open unto them thy mind ? And are the woods 
where elephants breed, kept by thee ; and hast thou kine ? 
And dost thou not foster mares and female-elephants? 
And dost thou show thyself daily in the court, well robed? 
And rising in the morning, dost thou show thyself in the 
high-ways ? And do thy servants boldly present them- 
selves before thee ; or do they all keep away ? A middle 
course contributes to their good fortune. And are all the 
forts furnished with wealth, corn, arms, water, machines, 
artizans, and bowmen ? And are thy incomings great and 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A 70DHYAKANDAM. 



457 



outgoings slender ? And, 0 Raghu’s descendant, thou dost 
not give away thy coffers unto the undeserving ? And dost 
thou spend thy wealth in the interests of the deities, or the 
fitris , or the Br&hmanas who have come unto thee, or war- 
riors, or friends ? If any respectable, pure-spirited and clean 
person happen to be accused by some one of theft or other 
crimes, dost thou from covetuousness punish him without first 
having him tried by persons versed in scripture ? And, O best 
of men, is a thief, that hath been caught, interrogated (as to his 
guilt), and found with the stolen property on his person, set 
free (by thy men) from motives of gain ? And do thy coun- 
sellors, O descendant of Raghu, accomplished in various lore, 
uninfluenced by greed, consider the conduct of both the rich 
and the poor involved in peril ? O son of the Raghu race, 
the tears of those who have been falsely charged with any 
offence, (and who have failed to obtain justice), dropping, 
destroy the sons as well as the beasts of the ruler that minds 
his own comfort only. And dost thou with these three — gifts, 
mind and word — try to win over aged people, boys, 
physicians, and the principal ones ? And dost thou salute 
spiritual preceptors, aged persons, ascetics, gods, guests, 
Chaityas, emancipated ones, and BrShmanas ? And thou dost 
not oppose righteousness by interest, or interest by virtue, 
or both by desire, intent on gratifying the senses ? And, O 
foremost of conquerors, dost thou, O thou cognisant of 
time, in season resorting to interest, desire, and virtue res- 
pectively, attain them, O bestower of boons? And do 
Br&hmanas versed in all religious lore and knowing interest, 
together with the citizens and the inhabitants of the pro- 
vinces wish for thy happiness, O highly wise one ? Atheism, 
untruthfulness, inattention, anger, procrastination, compa- 
nionship with evil persons, indolence, gratification of the 
senses, consultation with a single person concerning the 
needs of a kingdom, taking counsel with those that are 
cognisant of evils alone, omission to take in hand a task 
58 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




45 * 



RAMAYANA . 



that hath been decided upon, divulgence of counsel, non- 
commencement of a course in the morning, and march* 
ing against all the foes at one and the same time, — 
hast thou eschewed these ten and four faults? And, 0 
descendant of Raghu, truly understanding the tenth,* fifth.t 
fourth! and seventh# classes as well as the eighth, || and third 
ones, ^ and the three kinds of learning,** and victory over 
the senses, and the evils human and superhuman, six 
attributes, tt and the (peculiar) duties (of royalty), and 
the twenty classes, and the kinds of Prakritis§§ and 
Mandala,|||| and YatrS,1Hf chastisement, and war and peace 
having each two sources ; dost thou with due order observe all 
these ? And, O wise one, dost thou, as laid down in the ordi- 
nance, take counsel, severally and in a body with three or four 
men ? And dost thou observe the Vedas ? And dost thou per- 
ceive the fruit of thy acts ? And have thy wives borne children ? 
And has thy knowledge of scripture borne fruit ? And, O 
descendant of Raghu, is thy intellect going the way that 1 
have indicated above ? This course is conducive to long life, 
and fame ; and virtue, desire and interest. And, O child, art 



* Hunting, gambling, sleeping in the day, calumny, addiction to women, 
wine, dancing, singing, playing, and roving without purpose. — T. 
f Five kinds of fortresses. — T. 

X Four kinds of means adopted for the governing and maintaining of 
a kingdom. — T. 

$ Seven pillars of a kingdom including the sovereign, counsellors Ac. — T. 

| Eight kinds of manifestation of anger. — T. 

% Interest, desire and virtue. — T. 

*• The Vedas ; agriculture and commerce &c. politics. — T. 
ft Peace, war, marching, halting, sowing dissensions, seeking protec- 
tion. — T. 

XX Twenty classes of men with whom peace should not be contracted. — T. 
$| These five are called PraJkritis, — minister, treasure, territory, fortress, 
chastisement. — T. 

f| Twelve classes of kings, who are ready to enter into a treaty, declare 
war or continue in a state of indifference. 

A fivefold marchiog out for war. 

i 

i 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A rODHYARANDAM . 



459 



thou following the course that was followed by our ancestors ? 
And art thou maintaining the conduct that is excellent and 
passes along pious ways ? And, O son of Raghu, thou dost 
not alone partake of sapid meats thyself alone ? And dost 
thou share them with those friends who expect it ? The 
learned king ruling (all) righteously — that chastiser of the 
subjects — the monarch attaining duly the entire earth, going 
away from hence, acquires the celestial regions.” 



SECTION ci. 



TC nowing Bharata as devoted to his superior R3ma 
along with his brother Lakshmana, asked him, 'What 
for is this (visit of thine unto the woods) ? I wish to hear 
as clearly related by thee the reason why clad in blackdeer- 
skin and wearing matted locks, thou, leaving thy kingdom, 
hast come to these regions. It behoveth thee to tell me all 
this.” Thus accosted by the high-souled KSkutstha, Kaikeyi's 
son, suppressing his grief by a strong effort, with joined 
hands said, “O noble one, forsaking us all, our father possess- 
ed of mighty arms, having performed this terrible task, in 
consequence of being urged by a woman, my mother Kaikeyi, 
hath gone to heaven afflicted with grief on account of his 
son, O repressor of foes. And she hath committed a signal 
sin capable of destroying her fame. And without obtaining 
the kingdom which she had coveted as the fruit of her 
action, a widow tried with grief, my mother will fall into a 
terrible hell. Now it behoves thee to extend thy favor unto 
me who have become thy slave. Do thou this very day get 
thyself installed in the kingdom, like unto Indra himself. 
All these subjects and our widowed mothers have come 
unto thee. It behoves thee to show thy favor unto them. 
Thm art the first-born ; and meet it is that thou shouldst get 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




460 



RAMA F ANA. 



thyself installed, O bestower of honor. Therefore do thou 
receive the kingdom righteously and fulfil the desire of thy 
friends. And like the autumnal Night on having the un- 
clouded moon, let the entire Earth cease to be a widow on 
having thee, her lord. With bent head I beseech thee along 
with these counsellors. It behoves thee to show thy favor unto 
thy brother, disciple, and slave. Therefore, O chief of men, 
thou ought not to pass by this honored band of ancestral 
ministers, who have always been serving this race.” Having 
said this, with tears flooding his eyes, the mighty-armed son 
of Kaikeyi, Bharata, again took RAma's feet on his head. 
Thereupon RAma embracing his brother Bharata resembling 
a mad elephant, and sighing again and again, said, “Of a 
high race, possessed of strength, endowed with energy, and 
vowed unto sterling worth of character, how can one like 
me commit sin for the sake of dominion ? Fault find I none 
ever so small in thee, thou destroyer of foes. Nor doth it 
become thee from puerility to tax thy mother, O exceedingly 
wise one, O thou that art sinless, superiors may act as they 
list in relation to those wives and sons of theirs that are after 
their heart. And this also thou shouldst learn that wives, 
sons and disciples should always be obedient as has been 
held by the emancipated ones. O mild one, the monarch 
is competent to make me stay in the woods clad in black 
deer-skin, as to establish me in the monarchy. And, O thou 
conversant with morality, O foremost of those observing 
righteousness, in respect of virtuous conduct, a mother should 
be as much regarded (by a son) as a father is. How can I, 
O descendant of Raghu, having been told by my righteous 
father and mother — ‘Go to the woods’ — act otherwise? Thou 
ought to receive the kingdom, AyodhyA, honored of men ; 
and I ought to dwell in Dandaka dressed in bark. Having 
made this division of duties in the presence of all, and also 
enjoined this, the mighty monarch, Da^aratha, hath ascended 
heaven. That superior of all, even the virtuous king, is thy 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AYODHYAKANDAM . 



461 



evidence. It behoves thee to enjoy that which hath been 
assigned unto thee by thy sire. And, O mild one, taking 
refuge in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen years, I will act 
the part that hath been set apart for me by my magnanimous 
father. What hath been assigned to me by that one respected 
by all men, my high-souled father resembling the lord of 
celestials himself, is my prime good ; the masterdom of all 
the worlds I would decline (should it be opposed to the will 
of my sire).” 



SECTION cm. 

> O' 

Hearing RUma's words, Bharata answered, “Deprived 
of the kingdom in consequence of my posteriority in point of 
birth, what doth regard for morality avail me ? O best of men, 
even this morality has ever been established with reference 
to us, viz., that the eldest son of the king existing, a younger 
one cannot be the king. Do thou, therefore, O RUghava go 
along with me to the prosperous AyodhyS ; and get thyself 
installed there for the behoof of our race. Although a king 
observing interest and virtue, and who towers above average 
humanity, hath been called a mortal, yet to me he is a very 
deity. While I was in Kekaya and thou wast in the forest, 
that intelligent monarch honored of the good, given to cele- 
brating sacrifices, ascended heaven. As soon as thou hadst 
set out (for the forest) along with Sit& and Lakshmana, the 
king borne down by grief and chagrin, went to heaven. O 
foremost of men, do thou arise, and offer water unto the 
spirit of our sire. Satrughna and I have ere this offered 
water unto (the departed). O RSghava, anything offered 
unto the (manes of the) ancestors by a beloved descendant, 
conduces to their eternal behoof $ aud thou wast the favorite 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




462 



RAMAYANA. 



of our father. Mourning thee and exceedingly desirous of 
seeing thee, his mind being fastened on thee and incapable 
of being turned away, deprived of thee, and smitten with 
grief on thy account, thy father departed this life, remember* 
ing thee.” 



SECTION cm. 

Hearing those piteous words uttered by Bharata in 
connection with the demise of their father, RJLghava was 
deprived of his senses. And on that thunder-bolt of a speech 
being uttered by Bharata, like unto a (real) thunder-bolt 
hurled in battle by the enemy of the Dinavas (Indra), that 
subduer of foes, Rama, stretching his arms, fell down to the 
earth, like a blossoming tree that hath been hewn by an axe. 
Seeing that lord of the world and mighty bowman, RSma, 
fallen, like a sleeping elephant fatigued with turning up earth 
with its tusks, his brothers exercised with sorrow, broke out 
into lamentations, and along with Videha’s daughter began 
to sprinkle water (on his face). Then regaining his conscious- 
ness, KSkutstha shedding tears from his eyes, distressfully 
addressed himself to speech. And hearing that lord 
of earth, his sire, had gone to heaven, that righteous one 
said unto Bharata words fraught with virtue and interest, 
“What shall I do with AyodhyS, my sire having gone the 
way ordained by the gods ? And who will govern her, 
now that she hath been deprived of that foremost of mon- 
archs ? Of fruitless birth that I am, what can I do for that 
magnanimous one? And of him that renounced his life 
from grief on my account. 1 have not even performed the 
last rites. Ah ! Bharata, thou, O sinless one* art blessed, 
since by thee as well as by Satrughna have been performed 
all the funeral rites of the king. To Ayodhyl, bereft of the 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A VODHVAKAJSTDAM. 



463 



monarch, having none to preside over her destinies, and 
many rulers, will I not return even when the term of my 
abode in the woods has been passed. My father having gone 
to the other world, who, O subduer of enemies, will again 
counsel me when, my stay in the forest being over, I shall have 
returned unto AyodhyS. ? And from whom shall I hear 
those words grateful unto the ear, which my father gratifying 
me used to speak unto me when I happend to do something 
well ?” Having thus addressed Bharata, Raghava burning 
in grief, spoke unto his wife, with her countenance resembling 
the full moon, saying, “O Sit5, thy father-in-law is dead 
and, O Lakshmana, thou art fatherless. Bharata has com- 
municated unto me the sad intelligence that our father hath 
ascended heaven/’ When K&kutstha had said this, tears 
began to shower forth from the eyes of the renowned princes. 
Then all those brothers pacifying as best they could Rlma 
stricken with sorrow, said unto him, “Do thou perform the 
watery rites of that lord of the earth, our sire.” Having 
heard that her father-in-law, the king, had gone to the 
celestial regions. Siti with her eyes filled with tears, could 
not see her beloved. Thereupon, pacifying the weeping 
daughter of Janaka, RSma moved with grief, spoke unto the 
distressed Lakshmana, saying, “Do thou bring Ingudi fruits 
as well as a piece of new bark. I will go to perform the 
watery rites of our high-souled sire. Let Sit5 go first. Do 
thou follow her. I shall go last. Even this is the course 
of those in mourning.” Then that magnanimous one, having 
a knowledge of the soul, mild, graceful, capable of controlling 
his senses, steady in his regard for Rama, and ever following 
him — Sumantra — in company with those sons of the king, 
having cheered up Raghava, brought him to the auspi- 
cious river, Mand&kini. Then those illustrious ones, having 
in distress arrived at the river MandSkini, having convenient 
descents, charming, ever furnished with blossoming woods, 
and of rapid currents ; and approached its descents, goodly 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




4*4 



RAMA FAN ! . 



and void of mud, offered water unto the monarch, uttering, 
“May this be so !” And the protector of the earth (Rama), 
holding water with his joined hands, facing the south, said 
weeping, “O foremost of monarchs, may this clear water 
knowing no deterioration, reach thee, who hast gone to the 
world of the ancestral manes l 1 ’ Then drawing nigh unto 
the marge of the Mand&kini, the energetic R&ghava along 
with his brothers, offered the Pinda unto his father. And 
placing the Ingudi Pinda mixed with juyube on a bed of 
darvbka , Rama crying in distress, said, “O mighty monarch, 
do thou well pleased feed on this, which we also live upon. 
That which is the fare of an individual, is also the fare of 
his divinities.” Then that foremost of men ascending the 
bank of the stream by the self-same way, got up on the 
charming side of the hill. And having arrived at the gate of 
the cottage of leaves, that lord of the earth held both 
Bharata and Lakshmana with his hands. And there the hill 
reverberated at the sounds raised by the brothers wailing 
along with Vaidehi, like unto lions roaring. And perceiv- 
ing the loud uproar of those mighty ones engaged in offering 
water unto their sire, indulging in lamentations, the army of 
Bharata became agitated. And they said, “For certain 
Bharata hath met with R£ma ; and this mighty noise proceeds 
from them, as they are bitterly mourning their deceased 
sire.” Thereat leaving aside their vehicles, they with one 
mind, rushed towards the spot wherefrom proceeded the up- 
roar. And of those that were tender, some went on horses, 
and some on elephants, and some on ornamented chariots, 
while others went on foot And eager to behold R£ma stay- 
ing away for a short time, though seeming to do so for a long 
period, all the men at once went to the hermitage. And 
desirous of witnessing the meeting of the brothers (with 
RSma), they with all despatch proceeded by means of various 
vehicles consisting of beasts and cars. And the ground trod- 
den by the wheels of innumerable cars, emitted loud sounds. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A YODUYARANDAM. 



465 



like those emitted by the sky on clouds gathering. 
And frightened by the uproar, elephants accompanied by 
female ones, perfuming all sides (by the fragrance of tem- 
poral juice), went to another forest. And boars, and deer, 
and lions, and buffalos, and Srtmaras, and tigers, and 
Gokarnas, Gay als and Prishatas were striken with panic. And 
wild with alarm, Chakrav&kas and swans, and Natyuhas y 
and Plavas , and Karandavas> and male coels, and Kraunchas , 
fled away in all directions. And the welkin was enveloped 
by birds frightened by the noise, as the earth was covered by 
men, and both the sky and the land then gave out great efful- 
gence. As the people suddenly saw that foremost of men, 
the sinless and illustrious R&ma seated on the ground, 
accusing Kaikeyi as well as the vile ManthariL, the people 
approached Rama, with their countenances discovering 
tears. Seeing those men oppressed with grief with their 
eyes filled with tears, that one cognizant of virtue like fathers 
and mothers, embraced those that deserved it And he 
embraced some persons ; and some offered him salutations. 
And the king’s son, as each deserved, properly received them 
along with their friends and equals in age. And the sounds, 
produced by those high souled persons lamenting, resound- 
ing the earth and the sky, and the mountain-caverns, and 
all the cardinal points, were heard like peals of Mrid - 
angas . 



SECTION CIV. 



Desirous of seeing Rlma, Vasishtha, taking before him 
the wives of Da9aratha, proceeded towards the hermitage. 
And as the wives of the king were going slowly by the 
Mand&kini, they discovered the landing-place which was 
used by Rftma and Lakshmana. Thereupon Kau^alyd, with 
59 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




466 



RAMA7ANA . 



her eyes filled with tears and her countenance rendered pale, 
observed unto the forlorn Sumitra as well as the other wives 
of the king, “Sacred like unto a first wife, in this forest this 
is the landing-place of those unfortunate ones of untiring 
energy, who had been deprived of the kingdom. From here, 
O SumitrSL, doth thy son, Saumitri, ever vigilant, personally 
procure water for my son. Although thy son performeth a 
servile office, yet he is not to blame : (the performance of) that 
alone which serves no purpose of his brother possessed of 
many perfections, could bring blame upon him. To day let thy 
son, who doth not deserve such toilsome work, cease to per- 
form that office which is fraught with hardships fit only for the 
base.” That lady of expansive eyes happened to see on the 
earth the Ingudi pinda> which had been placed by R&ma 
for his sire on the darbha with their tops pointing south- 
wards. Seeing this, which had been placed on the ground by 
Rama disconsolate for his sire, the noble Kau^alyS addressed 
all the wives of Da<?aratha, saying, “Do ye behold this that 
hath been duly offered to the high-souled descendant of 
Raghu — lord of the Ikshv&ku race — by RSghava. I do not 
deem this as fit fare for that magnanimous monarch resem- 
bling a celestial, who had enjoyed every luxury (in life). Hav- 
ing enjoyed this earth bounded by the four seas, how can that 
lord of the world, resembling on earth the mighty Indra, 
feed on this Ingudi pinda ? Nothing appeareth to me more 
deplorable in this world than this that the auspicious R&ma 
hath offered an Ingudi cake unto his father. Seeing the Ingudi 
pinda offered by R&ma unto his father, why doth not my 
heart break into a thousand shivers ? Now the tradition 
in vogue among men, appearth to be true, viz., that “the fare 
that is partaken by a person, is also partaken by his deity.” 
Then those that were co-wives with her, consoled the dis- 
tressed K§u 9 aly<!L ; and, (entering the asylum), beheld R&ma 
like an immortal dropped from the celestial regions. Seeing 
R&ma, who had been deprived of every comfort, his mothers. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




A VODHVAKANDAM . 



467 



overwhelmed with grief and distress, began to shed tears, 
lamenting. Raising his mothers, that foremost of men, 
Rftma, true to his promise, took hold of those lotus feet of 
theirs. And those ones furnished with expansive eyes, (on 
their turn) by means of their fair hands of delicious feel 
furnished with soft fingers and palms, fell to rubbing the dust off 
Rftma's back. After Rftma had done, Sumitrft's son also, seeing 
all his mothers, with sorrow gently paid his reverence unto 
them with affection. Thereat, as they had treated Rftma, all the 
ladies treated that one sprung from Da^aratha, Lakshmana, 
graced with auspicious marks. Sitft also with her eyes filled 
with tears, having taken hold of the feet of her mothers-in- 
law, stood before them in distressful guise. Embracing that 
woeful one in banishment, even as a mother doth her daughter, 
Kau^alyft, smitten with grief, said, “The daughter of Videha’s 
King, and the daughter-in-law of Da^artha, and the wife of 
Rftma himself — why doth such a lady undergo misery in the 
lone forest ? O Vaidehi, beholding thy face like unto a lotus 
heated under the sun, or a lily that hath been crushed, or 
like unto gold covered with dust, or the moon enveloped by 
clouds, grief begot of this vortex of disaster that is in my 
mind, fiercely burneth me, as fire consumeth a structure.” As 
his wretched mother was thus speaking, Bharata’s elder 
brother, Rftghava, approaching, took the feet of Vasishtha. 
Having taken hold of the feet of the priest resembling a 
flame, and of accumulated energy, — like unto that lord of the 
immortals, Indra, taking the feet of Vrihaspati, Rftghava sat 
down with him. Then behind them (Rftma and Vasishtha), 
along with his own counsellors, and principal citizens, and 
generals, and persons of eminent piety, — sat the virtuous 
Bharata in the presence of his elder brother. Seeing Rftgha- 
va in the guise of an ascetic, flaming in grace, the exceed- 
ingly powerful Bharata with joined palms sat down in com- 
pany with his brother, like the great Indra of controlled 
faculties in presence of Prajapftti. “What will Bharata, having 



Digitized by 



Google 




468 



RAM AY AN A* 



bowed unto R&ghava and paid him homage, will say to him V-* 
this intense curiosity arose in (the minds of) all the noble 
persons present there. And R&ghava having truth and for- 
bearance, and Laksmana endowed with magnanimity, and 
Bharata possessed of righteousness, surrounded by their 
friends, appeared (there) like unto the three fires surrounded 
by Sadasyas. 



SECTION cv. 



.A.S those foremost of persons surrounded by their friends 
indulged in lamentations, the night passed away in grief. 
On the night being succeeded by an auspicious morning, 
those brothers surrounded by their friends, having performed 
Homa and Japa on the Mand&kini, returned unto R&ma. 
And sitting silent, no one said anything. Then Bharata 
addressed R&ma in the midst of those friends, saying, “My 
mother was (first) pacified (by grant of the kingdom.) 
The kingdom is (now) mine. I grant the same unto thee. 
Do thou enjoy the kingdom rid of its thorns. Like unto a 
dyke forced by a torrent during the rains, this mighty 
monarchy is difficult of being protected save by thee. As a 
mule is incapable of imitating the course of a horse, or as 
birds, that of Tarkshya, I, O Lord of earth, lack the strength 
to imitate thee. O R&ma, ever happy is the life of him that 
others depend upon for subsistence : unhappy is the life of 
the person that depends upon others for support. As a tree 
planted by a person, and by him made to increase, (until at 
last), sending out branches, a mighty tree, it is incapa- 
ble of being got up by a dwarf ; and then, if, flowering, it 
show no fruits, it cannot contribute to the satis* 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




AVODHrAKANDAM . 



469 



faction of him for whom it hath been planted. 0 mighty- 
armed one, this comparison is meant for thee. This* it 
behoves thee to apprehend, inasmuch as thou art our excel- 
lent lord, and thou dost not teach us who depend upon thee 
for support Let the principal orders, O monarch, behold 
thee, represser of foes— established in the kingdom, like the 
powerful sun himself. O K&kustha, let mad elephants roar, 
with the view of following thee ; and let the women of the 
inner apartments with concentrated minds utter jubilation. 1 ' 
On hearing the words of Bharata, who was beseeching R£ma, 
many of the citizeus expressed their approbation by exclaim- 
ing, “Excellent well! >l Seeing the illustrious Bharata 
aggrieved and engaged in lamentation, the calm and consider- 
ate Rima consoled him, saying, “No creature is endowed 
wth the power of exercising any control over the course of 
events, — man has no independent status (in nature). The 
Destoyer draws him both here and hereafter. Those that in- 
crease, are destined to deteriorate ; those that go upward, 
ultimately fall, those that come together, separate in the end ; 
and life at length meets with death. As a ripe fruit hath no 
other fear than fall, so man who is born, hath no other fear 
than death. Even as a stout-pillared edifice, getting dilapidat- 
ed, waxes weak, so men coming under the sway of decrepitude 
and death, get enfeebled. A night that hath gone by, doth 
not return, as the full Jamuni, when she hath entered the 
ocean, doth not come back. In this world, days and nights 
pass away with creatures, and speedily impair their lives, 
even as in summer the rays (of the sun) (dry up) the 
waters. Do thou therefore deplore thyself. Why dost thou 
lament any thing else ? Every one’s life is decreasing, whether 
he sits or moves. Death goeth with one, sitteth down 
with one, and, after having gone a long way, retumeth with 
one. The person is filled with folds in the skin, the hair 
hath grown hoary, the individual is enfeebled because of age, — 

♦ The import of tk* imagt. — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQle 





470 



RAMA TANA. 



by doing what, can he prevent this ? People rejoice on the 
rising of the sun ; they feel delighted at the approach of 
night, — but they do not understand that their lives have 
(meanwhile) been shortened. People are exhilarated at the 
commencement of a new season in novel fashion ; creatures 
get their lives shortened at the change of seasons. As on 
the mighty ocean, one piece of wood comes in contact 
with another ; so, a person, having been in association with 
another, is seperated from him in time. In this way, 
wives and sons and kindred and wealth, having been in 
association, go away ; their separation is certain. There 
exists not one in this world that can change one's nature as 
received. A person lamenting a dead individual, hath no 
power to prevent his own death. As, while one is proceed- 
ing on a road, another stationed by the way, says, 
*1 too will go in thy wake', even so, the way that hath 
been followed by our predecessors, (must be followed as 
well by us.) Why should people mourn (for deceased re- 
latives), when they are themselves subject to the fate that 
knoweth no turning ? (Perceiving the destruction of) life 
declining, like unto a current that never turneth back, one 
should engage his soul in happiness $ for all men are said to 
be born for the same. My child, our righteous sire, who, 
after having performed excellent and entire sacrifices, 
accompanied with dakshinas , hath repaired to heaven, 
honored of the good, should not be mourned.* Having re- 
nounced his human frame wasted and worn out with 

* The N. W. P. text has seven additional lines here, wanting in the other 
texts : — “That lord of the earth, our father Dasaratha, hath gone to heaven. 
On account of having adequately maintained his servants and governed his 
subjects, and virtuously given away wealth, our sire hath gone to heaven. 
And by virtue of supremely excellent and desirable acts, and sacrifices accom- 
panied with dakshinas, that master of this world, our father Dasaratha, hath 
ascended heaven. And having celebrated many sacrifices and enjoyed lux- 
uries, that lord of the earth, having attained a goodly age, hath gooe to 
heaven.” — T. 



Digitized by LjOOQ le 




A rODHTAKANDAM. 



47i 



age, our father hath attained celestial state, which ex- 
ists in the regions of Brahm&. Such an one should 
never be mourned by any wise person like thee or my- 
self, accomplished in learning and more than ordinarily 
intelligent. Such manifold grief and mourning and lamenta- 
tion should be renounced by intelligent and firm per- 
sons in all conditions in life. Do thou cast off this grief: 
let not sorrow overpower thee. Going thither, stay Ain that 
city. And, O best of speakers, this was also enjoined by 
our sire of controlled senses. I also must do my noble 
father’s will as to whatever that one of pious acts has laid 
upon me. O subduer of foes, it is not proper for me to pass 
by his orders. So thay are also worthy of being honored by 
thee. He is our friend and father. O descendant of Raghu, 
that mandate of our righteous father, acceptable unto me, 
will I obey by abiding in the woods. O foremost of men, 
(good in) the next world is capable of being attained by an 
honest and pious person crowned with sterling virtues, 
ever following his superiors. O best of men, thinking that 
our father Da^aratha has attained excellent state, do thou, 
resorting to all noble qualities, seek thy welfare in the next 
world.” Having said these significant words unto his younger 
brother, with the view of making him obey the injunctions 
of their father, that lord, the magnanimous R&ma, paused. 



SECTION CVI.




/ 

L 



THE 

RAMAYANA. 



Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 



ARANYA KlASTIXA JVC. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 

MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A. 

Rector, Keshub Academy. 



PRINTED BY 

Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 

Dev a Press, 65/2, B radon Street. 

CALCUTTA. 

1891. 



I All rights reserved.} 




AEANYA KANDAM. 



SECTION I. 



Entering the extensive forest of Dandaka, the irrepressi- 
ble and self-composed Rftma saw the collection of asylums 
belonging unto the ascetics, strewn with Ki^a and bark, 
and environed by spiritual energy; incapable of being beheld; 
like the solar disc in the heavens, — the refuge of all crea- 
tures — w ith their ornamented yards ; filled with a great 
many deer, and abounding in multitudes of birds ; in which 
Apsar&s always danced and which they held in respect ; 
(asylums) beauteous with spacious rooms for fire-sacrifice, 
with sacrificial necessaries, deer-skins, Ku9a, faggots, water- 
pitchers, fruits and roots ; surrounded by mighty and sacred 
forest-trees; crowned with lucious fruits ; honored with Vali* 
and Homat ; holy ; resounding with the sounds of Vedic 
recitations; scattered with divers blossoms; and contain- 
ing tanks filled with lotuses; with ancient ascetics liv- 
ing on fruits and roots, having their senses under control, 
wearing bark and black deer-skins, and possessing the 
•Splendour of the sun or fire ; and adorned by great and 
i^ioly sages living upon regulated fare. Beholding that 

* * Offerings to the spirits of air. — T. 

t Burnt offerings, or oblations of clarified butter into the sacred fire, as an 
ibffering to the gods, accompanied with prayers or invocations. — T. 

/ 64 



506 



RAMA TANA. 



collection of asylums belonging unto the ascetics, resembling 
the regions of BrahmS, resonant with the voices of Vedic 
recitations ; and grateful ; with highly pious Br&hmanas 
versed in the Vedas, — the exceedingly energetic and graceful 
Raghava entered the same, having first unstrung his 
mighty bow. Thereupon, seeing the righteous Rama resembl- 
ing the moon risen, as well as Lakshmana and the illustrious 
Vaidehi, those Maharshis endeued with spiritual intui- 
tion, came forward (to meet the incomers) ; and, having 
uttered benedictions, those persons of rigid vows, received 
them. And those dwellers of the wood, struck with wonder, 
beheld R&ma’s tender grace and lovliness and elegance 
of dress. And struck with astonishment, those inhabitants 
of the woods of pre-eminent piety saw Vaidehi, Laksh- 
mana and R3ma, with winkless eyes. And those persons 
of exalted virtue, engaged in the welfare of all creatures, 
made RSghava, their guest, sit down in their thatched cottage. 
Then, having received R£ma respectfully according to scrip- 
tural prescription, those virtuous ones of eminent piety, res- 
embling fire, procured water (for R&ma). And, experiencing 
great delight, those high-souled ones, uttering benedictions, 
procured wild fruits, flowers and roots ; and, having assigned 
an asylum (unto Rama), those persons cognizant of righteous- 
ness, said with joined hands, “Possessed of high fame, thou, 
the protector of righteousness, art the refuge of these 
people. Thou shoudst be honored and worshipped, being 
their king, holding the rod, and their superior. O Raghava, it 
is because he that governs his subjects, is a fourth part of Indra 
himself, that the king, being bowed down unto by all, . 
enjoys the choicest things. And we, being in thy dominions, j 
ought to be protected by thee. Whether living in the cityi 
or in the woods, thou, lord of men, art our sovereign. We! 
have renounced chastising others ; and, O monarch, we have; 
conquered our anger, and subdued* our passions. Therefore, 1 
even as a child in its mother’s womb (should be protected : 




A RAN FA K AND AM. 



507 



by her), should we be protected by thee.” Having said this, 
they entertained Rlghava, along with Lakshmana, with 
fruits and roots and flowers and diverse other edibles pro- 
curable in the woods. In the same way, other ascetics of 
accomplished purposes, living lives of integrity, duly pleased 
that lord, R&ma, resembling Vai$y5nara. 



SECTION II. 



Having received the homage of the ascetics, R§ma 
about sun-rise, having greeted them all, entered into the 
forest. And R&ma, followed by Lakshmana, saw the heart 
of the forest abounding in various kinds of beasts, — ranged by 
bears and tigers, with its trees and shrubs torn and trampled, 
its pools turbid, and its birds crying. And, having in company 
with Sita arrived at that forest abounding in terrible beasts, 
K&kutstha saw a man-eater, resembling a mountain-summit, 
emitting tremendous roars, with hollow eyes, a huge face, 
frightful, having a deformed belly, disgusting, dreadful, 
Cyclopean, mis-shapen, of a horrible sight, clad in a tiger-skin, 
besmeared with fat, covered with blood, capable of frighten- 
ing all creatures, with his mouth widely extended, like unto 
the Destroyer himself, and uttering loud shouts, — who stood 
piercing with his iron dart three lions, four tigers, two leo- 
pards, four Prishatas, and the huge tusked head of an elephant 
dripping fat. Having seen R£ma and Lakshmana, as well as 
Sita the daughter of MithilA, he growing angry, rushed 
(against them), like the Destroyer himself rushing against 
creatures at the universal dissolution. Uttering a dreadful 
yell, and, as if making the earth tremble, he took Vaidehi 
on his waist, and, going a little distance, said, ”0 ye wearing 
bark and matted locks, O ye of feeble strength, that accom- 
panied by your (common) wife, have entered the forest of 




RAMAYANA. 



<p8 

Dandaka, bearing bows and arrows and scimitars, why, being 
ascetics, do ye wish to associate with a (single) woman f Ye 
wicked wretches, ye impious wights, who are ye that bring 
disgrace upon ascetics ? I am a Rlkshasa, Vir&dha by name. 
This forest is my fastness. Accoutred in arms, I range 
(here), feeding on the flesh of ascetics. This transcendentally 
beauteous one shall be my wife. And in battle I shall 
drink your blood, wretches that ye are.” Hearing the 
wicked and vaunting speech of the impious Vir&dha, as he 
said this, Janaka’s daughter, Sit&, began to tremble from 
fear, like a plantain tree shaken by the wind. Seeing the grace- 
ful Sita on the waist of Vir&dha, R&ghava with a blank coun- 
tenance said unto Lakshmana, "O amiable one, behold the 
daughter of king JanakS, my wife of pure ways, an illustrious 
princess brought up in luxury — on Vir&dha’s waist O 
Lakshmana, what had been wished for by Kaikeyi with 
reference to us, (hath taken place), and the dear boon (that 
she had asked) hath born fruit. That far-sighted lady — my 
second mother — who had not been satisfied with having 
secured the kingdom in the interests of her son, and by whom 
I that was dear unto her above all other creatures, had been 
banished to the woods, hath to-day her wishes crowned 
with success. O Sumitr&’s son, nothing can impart unto me 
greater anguish than the touching of Vaidehi by another — 
which surpasses my father's demise and my having been 
deprived of the kingdom.” As K&kutstha with his eyes 
flooded with tears was speaking thus, Lakshmana flying into 
a rage, spoke like unto a confined elephant : “Why dost thou, 
O K&kutstha, being the lord of all creatures and resembling 
V&sava himself, — and also backed by myself, thy servant,— 
grieve like one forlorn? The earth shall drink the gore 
of this Rakshasa, VirSdha, when deprived of life, after he 
hath been slain with a shaft by my angry self. That ire of 
mine which I had conceived against Bharata hankering after the 
kingdom, will I discharge on Vir&dha ; even as the weilder of 



THE 



RAMAYANA. 

Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 

ARANYA KlAlSTDA-M. 

EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 

tf ANMATHA NATH DUTT, U. A. 

Rector, Keshub Academy. 



PRINTED BY 

Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 

Dev a Press, 65/3, Bkadon Street. 

CALCUTTA. 

1891. 



I All rights reserved . 1 





5i° 



RAMA VAN A. 



me not with life.” Then stringing his bow, R§ma, 
speedily aiming at the Rikshasa, pierced him with sharpened 
shafts ; and (then) from his bow-string let go seven shafts, 
having their feathered parts plaited with gold, furnished 
with great velocity, and coursing like Suparna or the 
wind. Thereat, resembling flames, those arrows furnished 
with peacocks’ feathers, pierced VirSdha’s body, and fell to 
the earth, covered with blood. On being thus pierced, the 
R&kshasa set Vaidehi down, and, upraising a dart, rushed in 
wrath towards R5ma and Lakshmana. And sending forth a 
mighty roar, he took up a dart resembling the banner of 
Sakra; and he then appeared like the Destroyer* with open- 
ing mouth. Then the brothers showered a blazing volley of 
shafts on the RUkshasa, resembling the Destroyer himself. 
And stationing himself at a spot, the R§kshasa, laughing 
terribly, yawned, and as he yawned the flest-coursing shafts fell 
off from his person. And by virtue of the bestowal of the boon 
(by Brahma), the R&kshasa VirSdha drew up his vital ener- 
gies, and, lifting up a pike, darted at the descendants of 
Raghu. That best of those bearing arms cut off with two 
arrows that dart resembling the thunder-bolt and flaming 
in the sky. And the dart severed by the shafts of R3ma, 
fell to the earth, as falls a crag severed by the thunderbolt. 
Thereat, swiftly raising up a sword, resembling a black 
snake, each (of the Rlghavas) approached his antagonist, 
and began to assail him hastily. Thus hard beset, that 
terrible one, seizing them both with his arms, attempted to 
make away with those foremost of men, who, however, retain- 
ed their calmness. Reading his purpose, R£ma spake unto 
Lakshmana, “Let the RSkshasa bear us by this way. 

* The text has Kalantakoyamopame — abl. — resembling Kala, Antaha, or 
Yama. The commentator cites a sloka , which assigns three several functions 
to the three, — Kala executes his office on the occasion of the separation of life 
from the body ; Antaka compasses the end ; and Yama finally sits in judgment 
upon the departed soul. But this strikes me as misplaced erudition. I, however, 
give the commonsense rendering. — T. 




aRANTAKANDAM. 



5 11 



Mot use of letting him. 0 Sumitr&'s son, let the Rakshasa bear 
is wherever he likes. Even this, by which the ranger of the 
light is proceeding, is our way.” And lifting up (Rama and 
Lakshmana) by his might and prowess, as if they were 
striplings, that haughty ranger of the night laid them on 
lis shoulders. And having deposited the Raghavas on his 
shoulders, Viradha — ranger* of night — sending up dreadful 
shouts, directed his course towards the forest. And he at 
ength entered the forest resembling a mighty mass of clouds, 
Furnished with various kinds of trees, picturesque with 
diverse species of birds, and abounding in jackals, serpents 
and beasts. 



SECTION IV. 



Seeing those foremost of Raghus, the Kakutsthas, carried 
away, Sit2L cried in a loud voice, raising up her arms,f “Raima, 
Lhe son of Da^aratha, the strong, the truthful and the pure, 
is, along with Lakshmana, being carried away by you, 
Rakshasa of a terrible appearance. Me bears will devour and 
tigers and panthers. Renouncing the Kakutsthas, do thou 
carry me away. I bow unto thee, O best of Rakshasas.” Hear- 
ing these words of Vaidehi, Rama and Lakshmana bestirred 
themselves for compassing the death of that wicked one. And 
Sumitra's son broke his left arm ; while Rama at once broke 
the Rakshasa* s right one. On his arms being broken, the 
Rakshasa resembling a mass of clouds, growing weak, sank down 
on the ground in a swoon, like a hill riven by the thunderbolt. 
Thereupon, they assailed the Rakshasa with their fists, 

* Another reading is : — That ranger of the night laid on his shoulders, 
those ones, who were puffed up with their exceeding prowess. — T. 

t Another reading is Subhuyabhuyan — That one of elegant arms (raising) 
them up. — T. 




RAMA TANA. 



51a 

arms and feet; and lifting him up once and again, 
and pressing him, they trod on him over the ground. 
Although he was sore pierced by full many an arrow 
and cut sorryly by scimitars, and pressed down on the earth 
in various ways, yet the Rlkshasa expired not. Seeing him 
utterly incapable of being killed, and resembling a hill, that 
inspirer of hope in times of peril, the graceful (R§ma), said, 
“O foremost of men, in consequence of his austerities, yon 
R&kshasa cannot be vanquished with weapons in conflict. 
Therefore, let us cast him into a pit. O Lakshmana, dig a 
capacious pit in this forest* for this Rakshasa resembling an 
elephant, terible, and of a grim presence.” Having said this 
unto Lakshmana, — “Do thou dig a pit,” the powerful Rama 
remained planting his foot on Vir&dha's throat. Having 
heard R&ghava’s words, the RSkshasa spake gently, “Slain 
am I, O chief of men, by thee possessed of strength equal to 
that of Sakra. Through ignorance, O foremost of men, 
I could not before know thee. Now I know thee that art 
R&ma, the worthy Son of Kau£aly3, my child ; as well as the 
highly virtuous Vaidehi and the renowned Lakshmana. By 
virtue of a curse, I entered this dreadful Rakshasi form, I a 
Gandharba, having been cursed by Vaifravana. Being pro- 
pitiated by me, that greatly famous one said, — ‘ When Rama 
the son of Da 9 aratha, shall slay thee in encounter, thou, at- 
taining thy natural condition, shalt repair to the celestial re- 
gions.' Getting wroth, he cursed me, who had been absent ; 
and thus did king Vai9ravana address me, who had conceived 
love for Rambh&. Through thy grace have I been freed from 
this fearful curse, I shall (now) repair to heaven. Hail, O re- 
pressor of foes ! Half a Yoyana hence, my child, dwells *he 
righteous and potent Maharshi, Sarabhanga, resembling/.Se 
Sun. Seek him speedily: he will bring about thy good. Casing 
me (into this pit) in the wood, do thou, O Rlma, peacefully go 
thy way. Even this is the eternal usage of the Rlkshasas. 

* The reading slightly varies in some texts.— T. 





XRANYAKlNDAM. 



513 



Those that die in the forest, attain eternal regions. 11 Having 
said this unto KSkutstha, the mighty Vir&dha, afflicted with 
arrows, having his body deposited (in the pit), attained 
heaven. Having heard that speech of Virildha, Righava order- 
ed Lakshmana, saying, “ O Lakshmana, do thou in' this forest 
dig a capacious pit for this R&kshasa resembling an elephant, 
dreadful, and of terrible acts. 1 ’ Having said unto Lakshma- 
na, “Dig a pit,” — R£ma possessed of prowess remained fix- 
inghis foot on Virldha’s throat. Then taking a hoe, Lakshraa-. 
na dug a spacious pit by the side of the huge-bodied* Vir&dha. 
Then when his throat had been freed, (Lakshmana) cast 
into the pit Virldha having ears resembling javelins, sending 
loud and dreadful sounds. Having vanquished him in fight, 
Rftma and Lakshmana possessed of activity and steady in 
fight, being exceedingly delighted, raising up the dreadful 
R&kshasa by main force, cast him howling (into the pit). Re- 
flecting that he was incapable of being slain (by sharpened 
weapons), those foremost of men, exceedingly well versed (in 
arms), compassed the death of that mighty Asura, Virldha, 
in the pit; after they had dug it. VirSdha had himself sincere- 
ly wished for his death at the hands of R&ma ; and that 
ranger of the woods had accordingly told (Rlma), — “My 
death cannot be effected by means of weapons.” Having 
heard these words, Rlma decided upon casting him into a 
pit And when the excessively strong R£kshasa entered the 
cavity, he made the forest resound with his cries. Having 
thrown him into the hole, Rlma and Lakshmana, their fears' 
removed, appeared with joyful looks, and rejoiced in that 
forest like the sun and the moon seated in the heavens.1 

* Mmkatmanam — lit . — htgh-souled. The poet may have applied the epithet 
n this sense in view of Virddha being really a Gandharba. I have, however, 
>ref erred the other sense, as being more in harmony with the character of 
/ir£dha as a Rdkshasa ; and have accordingly rendered the word, huge- 
hodied.—T. 

f Another reading of this line is : — And buried him under stones. The 
North-West Provinces text has four additional lines : — Having . slain the 

*5 







kVlflrA Vi 



SE CTIO N V. 



H aving in the forest slain the R^kshasa VirSdha 
possessed' of tremendous strength, R&ma endeued with 
prowess, embracing and cheering SitS, spoke unto his brother 
Lakshmana of flaming energy, saying, “This dense forest 
is hard to live in ; nor are we acquainted with thq, ways of 
the wood. Therefore will we speedily repair to the ascetic 
Sarabhanga.” Thereupon RSghava set out for the hermitage 
of Sarabhanga. And R&ma beheld a mighty wonder near 
that one of celestial virtue, who had purified his soul through 
asceticism. He saw the lord of the celestials, possessed 
of a resplendent person, resembling in effulgence the sun or 
Vaicwinara— mounted on a superb car — (saw) him that is 
followed by all the celestials, stationed in the sky, not touch- 
ing the earth, adorned in luminous ornaments — the god 
dressed in a clean apparel ; worshipped by many a high- 
souled personage dressed in the same way. And from a 
distance, (Rama) saw the car Stationed in the sky yoked with 
green steeds — resembling the infant sun ; and he saw the 
spotless umbrella possessing the beauty of a mass of white 
clouds, resembling the lunar disc,— and graced with varie- 
gated wreaths. And his (Indra's) head was being fanned 
by two chowrrs, costly and furnished with golden handles, 
held by two magnificent damsels ; and innumerable Gandhar- 
bas and Siddhas and prime sages were hymning the celestial 
stationed in the welkin. And seeing Sarabhanga engaged 
in converse with Satakratu, R&ma said unto Lakshmana (the 
following words). And pointing out the car, R£ma showed 
the wonder unto his brother. “Behold, O Lakshmana, yonder 



car stationed in the sky, splendid, furnished with^exceeding 



Rakshasa and taken Mithila's daughter , those ones having bows ~~ 
gold, being delighted, rejoiced in that mighty forest , like the sun and,? 
seated in the sky . — T. *rt 



e on 



Iran y a k And am. 515 

grace, wonderful, and seeming as if the sun had fallen from 
the heavens. The steeds standing in the sky are for certain 
those of which we had formerly heard as belonging unto 
Sakra of many sacrifices. And, thou foremost of men, these 
youths environing (the celestial) by hundreds, wearing ear- 
-rings, and bearing swords in their hands, are broad of chest, 
have arms resembling bludgeons in size, and are clad in crimson 
vesture, like unto tigers incapable of being approached. Over 
the breasts of all appear chains of blazing sheen ; and, O son 
of SumitrS, their beauty appears that of five and twenty. And 
even this is the ever-enduring age of the celestials, as these 
foremost of men of sweet looks appear. O Lakshmana, stay 
-here awhile with Vaidehi, so long as I do not gather 
who it is that is in the effulgent car.” Saying unto 
Sumitr&s son, “Stay here,” Kakutstha bent his steps towards. 
Sarabhanga’s aslylum. And seeing Rlma approach, Sachi’s 
lord, taking Sarabhanga’s permission, addressed the celestials,, 
saying, 'Tiima is coming hither. Do ye set out for another 
place, ere he yet addresses me. He is not fit to behold 
me (now.) When he shall have vanquished (his foe in fight), 
.and won success, shall I readily show myself unto him. He 
shall have to achieve an act incapable of being achieved by 
others.” Then rendering homage unto that anchoret and 
conversing with him, the weilder of the thunderbolt — subduer 
of enemies — repaired to heaven in a car yoked with steeds. 
When the thousand-eyed one had gone away, R&gbavai 
accompanied by his companions appeared before Sarabhanga 
in the Agni-h»tra chamber. Taking his feet, RSma, Siti and 
Lakshmana sat down with the permission of the ascetic, 
who received them and set apart quarters for them. Then 
- Rlghava questioned (the sage) concerning the visit of Sakra ; 
and Sarabhanga related everything unto R&ghava. ”0 Rama, 
this bestower of boons wishes to take me to the regions of 
Brahma. I have conquered them, incapable of being attained 
by persons that have not schooled themselves, — by virtue of 




516 



RjLMlFANA. 



fierce austerities. O chief of men, knowing that thou wert 
near, I became anxious to go to the minor celestial regions 
and the supreme heaven (of Brahm&), after I had seen thee, 
righteous and high-souled, who art my dear guest now. O 
foremost of men, I have for aye attained the excellent regions 
of Brahm& and N&kaprishtha. Do thou receive them as per- 
taining to me.” Thus addressed by the sage, Sarabhanga, 
that best of men, R&ghava, versed in every branch of 
learning, said, “O mighty anchoret, I shall acquire all those 
regions myself. I now wish that thou mayst direct me as 
to my abode in this forest.” Thus accosted by RAghava 
resembling Sakra in strength, the eminently wise Sarabhanga 
again said, “O Rima, here in this forest lives a pious and self- 
restrained ascetic of mighty energy, named Sutikshna. He 
will bring about thy good. O R&ma, follow this Mand&kini 
flowing among flowers, which (here) runs in an opposite 
•direction to her usual course ; and then wilt thou reach there. 
This is thy course, thou best of men. Do thou now, my 
child, for a space look at me; while I leave off my limbs, 
even as a serpent renounces its slough.” Then preparing 
a fire and with Mantras offering oblations into it, the exceed- 
ingly energetic Sarabhanga entered into the fire. The fire 
consumed the down, hair, old skin, bones, flesh and blood of 
that high-souled one. (Anon) Sarabhanga became a youth 
resembling fire; and rising from the flame, he appeared 
splendid. And proceeding past the regions of high-souled 
sages sacrificing with fire, as well as of the celestials, he 
ascended those of BrahmS. And that one of pious acts done 
on earth — that best of the twice-born race — saw the grand- 
father, in company with his followers. And the grand-father 
also, beholding that Br&hmana, rejoiced greatly, and said,— 
"Hail!” 




1 RA N¥ A KANDA M. 
SECTION VI. 



5*7 



A FTER Sarabhanga had ascended heaven, ascetics in 
bodies, assembled together, presented themselves before 
K&kutstha; R&ma of flaming energy. And Vaikh&nasas, and 
V&lakhilyaS, and Sanprakh&las, Marichipas, Afmwakuttas in 
numbers, and those ascetics, Patr&h&ras, and Dantolu- 
khalas, Unmajjakas next, and G&tracayy&s, and A^ayy&s 
and Anavak&cikas, those ascetics, Salil&h&ras, V&yubha- 
ksbas after them, Ak& 9 anilayas, Sthandila^Syis, Urddha- 
vlsis of controlled senses, and Ardrapattav&sas given to 
Japa % practising penances, and engaged in performing 
the five kinds of austerities — all furnished with the grace 
that comes of spiritual energy, and all firmly concentrated in 
Yoga— these ascetics presented themselves before R&ma in 
the asylum of Sarabhanga. And coming before R&ma, the 
foremost of those practising righteousness, those sages 
conversant with morality, — met in a body, said unto that 
pre-eminently virtuous one, “A mighty car-warrior, thou 
art the foremost person of the Ikshw&ku race and the world ; 
as well as their lord,— even as Maghav&n is the lord of the 
celestials. Famous over the three worlds in high worth and 
prowess, in thee are found truth and virtue in profusion and 
obedience unto the mandate of thy sire. O lord, it behoves 
thee cognizant of virtue and attached unto it, to forgive us 
for what we as suiters say unto thee. The sin, O lord, of 
that monarch is mighty that taketh a sixth part of the 
subjects’ incomes, but doth not protect them as sons. But 
he that, setting his heart on protecting the people, doth ever 
carefully protect all the inhabitants of his dominions, like 
his own life or like his son dearer unto him than life itself, 
reapeth, O R&ma, enduring renown extending over many 
years, and (at length) attaining the regions of Brahm&, is 
glorified there. The king that protects his subjects righte- 




5 1 * 



RJlMIVANA. 



ously, is entitled to a fourth part of the great religious merit 
that is reaped by an ascetic subsisting on fruits and roots. 
O R&ma, this many Brahmanas — this great body of men that 
have assumed the Vanaprastha mode of life, although having 
thee for their lord, are being sorely troubled by R&kshasas, 
as if they had none. Come and behold the bodies of innu- 
merable ascetics of pure hearts that have in various ways 
been slaughtered by Rakshasas in the forest. And great 
is the worry that is experienced by the dwellers on the river 
Pampa and the Mandikini Ms well as those that reside in 
Chitrakuta. We cannot bear the terrible affliction of the 
ascetics in the forest at the hands of Rakshasas of dreadful 
deeds. Therefore, for obtaining refuge, have we come before 
thee who art the refuge (of all). Do thou, O Rama, deliver 
us all, who are being exceedingly afflicted by the rangers of 
the night. O hero, we have no greater refuge on earth 
than thyself. Do thou, O king’s son, rescue us all from 
Rakshasas. 1 ’ Hearing these words of the sages and ascetics, 
that righteous*souled one addressed them, saying, “It doth 
not behove you to speak thus. I should be commanded by 
the anchorets. I have entered the forest solely with a view 
to my own purpose. I have entered this forest in obedience 
to the mandate of my father, with the object (at the same 
time) of putting an end to these ravages of the Rakshasas on 
you. I have at my own will come hither for securing 
your interest. Then shall my stay in the woods be crowned 
with mighty fruit. I wish to slay in battle the enemies 
of the ascetics. Let . the sages and ascetics behold my 
prowess as well as that of my brother.” Having been con- 
ferred a boon by the ascetics, that hero entered upon a noble 
undertaking, and accompanied by the ascetics, in company 
■with Lakshmana directed his course to (the hermitage of) 
Sutikshna. 




JR A NY A K And AM. 
SECTION VII. 



5*9 



.A.ND RSma accompanied by his brother as well as Sits 
went to the asylum of Sutikshna in company with the twice- 
born ones. And having proceeded far, and crossed many 
a stream of copious waters, RSma saw a holy peak tower- 
ing high like the mighty Meru. Then those worthy scions of 
the IkshwSku race — descendants of Raghu — with SitS enter- 
ed the forest ever furnished with various kinds of trees. And 
having entered the dense forest abounding in blossoms and 
fruits and trees, RSma saw in a recess an asylum glittering 
with bark and garlands. There RSma duly addressed an 
ascetic seated in the lotus-attitude* for warding off evil, even 
Sutikshna, “O thou conversant with righteousness, speak to 
me, O Maharshi, O thou that hast truth for thy prowess.” 
Thereupon, eying RSma keenly, that calm (ascetic) — the 
foremost of those practising righteousness, embracing him 
with his arms, said, “ Welcome, thou foremost of the 
Raghus, O RSma, thou the best of those practising righteous- 
ness. This asylum now hath been furnished with its master 
in consequence of thy visit. O illustrious one, O hero, 
expecting thee, I have not yet ascended heaven, renouncing 
on earth this body of mine. I had (already) heard that, coming 
to Chitrakuta, (thou hadst been staying there), having been 
deprived of the kingdom. Here came, O KSkutstha, the 
Sovereign of the celestials of an hundred sacrifices. Coming 
to me, that mighty deity, the Sovereign of the celestials, said 
that I had acquired all the worlds by my pious acts. Do thou, 
by my grace, in company with thy wife and Lakshmana, dwell 
delightfully in those regions won by my asceticism, con- 
taining Devarshis. ,, Thereupon the self-possessed Rlma 
answered that blazing and truth-telling Br&hmana of fiery 
austerities, like Vftsava answering BrahmSL, saying, “O 



The yoya system has many positions for concentrating thought. — T. 




5io 



RlMXVANA. 



mighty ascet ; c, I mysdf will win those regions. I wish to 
be directed to a dwelling in this forest. Thou art possessed 
of ability in respect of everything, and art (at the same time) 
’engaged in the welfare of all beings,— this hath been told 
unto me by the high-souled Sarabhanga of the Gautama race.” 
Thus addressed by R9ma, that Maharshi known over all the 
worlds, Spoke sweet words in great joy, “O meritorious 
. Rama, even this is the asylum (for thee). Do thou live here 
pleasantly. It is inhabited by numbers of saints and is always 
provided with fruits and roots. This forest is haunted by 
herds of deer that range here without doing harm to any 
one, although they possess great energy; and go away, having 
bewitched people (by their beauty). Save what comes from 
these deer, there is no other evil to be encountered here.” 
Hearing those words of the Maharshi, the placid elder 
brother of Lakshmana, taking up his bow with the arrow set, 
said "O exalted one, if by means of sharpened shafts blazing 
like lightning, I slay those herds of deer when they 
come, it shall impart pain unto thee,- — and what can be more 
unfortunate than this ? Therefore I shall not be able to 
dwell long in this asylum.” Having said this, RAma ceased 
and became engaged in his evening adorations, and, having 
finished them, along with SitA and Lakshmana fixed his 
quarters in the asylum of Sutikshna. Then, when the evening 
had passed away and night fell, Sutikshna, having done 
homage unto those chiefs of men, offered them excellent fare, 
suitable to ascetics. 



3ECTION VMI. 



TT aving been well entertained by Sutikshna, RAma in 
company with SumitrA's son, having passed away the night 
there, awoke in the morning. And arising in due time, 




iRANyAKlNDAM. 



S 21 

R&ma along with Sit*, bathed in cool waters odorous 
with the aroma of lotuses ; and having in proper time duly 
worshipped Fire as well as the deities, in that forest con- 
taining abodes of ascetics, R9ma, Lakshmana and Videha’s 
daughter, their sins purged off, seeing the sun risen, approach- 
ed Sutikshna and spoke unto him these mild words, say- 
ing — 1 O Reverend sir, we have stayed here pleasantly, 
being excellently ministered unto by thee. We greet thee, 
and go away. The ascetics urge speed upon us. We hast- 
en to view the collections of asylums that belong unto the 
holy sages inhabiting the forest of Dandaka. Now we 
,crave thy permission along with that of these foremost of 
anchorites, steady in virtue, crowned with asceticism and 
self-controled, resembling smokeless flames. And we intend 
to set out ere the sun, like unto a low-sprung one that hath 
attained to auspicious fortune through evil ways, with rays in- 
capable of being borne, shines too fiercely .” Having said this, 
Righava along with Sit* and SumitrS’s son bowed down 
unto the ascetic’s feet. And as they touched his feet, that 
best of ascetics, raising RSma and Lakshmana up, embraced 
them closely and said, “ O Rama, go thy way safely, in com- 
pany with Sumitr&’s son and this Sit* that followeth thee 
like a shadow. Behold the beauteous asylums, O hero, of 
these pure-spirited ascetics inhabiting the forest of Dandaka. 
Thou wilt see blossoming woods garnishod with fruits and 
roots, containing goodly deer, and mild feathered tribes; 
tanks and pools laughing with blown lotuses, containing 
pleasant waters, and abounding in Kirandavas ; charming 
mountain-springs ; and romantic forests picturesque with pea- 
cocks. Go, O child ; and go thou also, O Sumitra’a son. 
And come again to my asylum after having seen these.” Thus 
addressed, K*kutstha along with Lakshmana, having gone 
round the ascetic, prepared for departing. Then Sita of ex- 
pansive eyes handed to the brothers excellent quivers, bows 
and shining swords. Then fastening the graceful quivers, 

66 




RlMll'ANA. 



5 n 

and taking the sweet-sounding bows, both Rkma and Laksh- 
mana issued from the hermitage. And permitted by the 
Maharshi, the R&ghavas furnished with grace, equipped with 
bows and scimitars, swiftly set out along with Sita. 



SECTION IX. 



W HEN the son of Raghu had set out with Sutikshna’spcr* 
mission, Sit§ addressed him in affectionate words and 
convincing speech, saying, — '‘Although thou art great 

and followest the narrow way (of righteousness), yet thou art 
on the eve of entering into unrighteousness. But thou 
couldst by refraining from action, eschew this unrighteousness 
that springs from an evil begot of desire. This evil begot 
of desire is threefold. One prominent % evil is falsehood, 
and both the others are of weightier significance, — associa- 
tion with others’ wives, and vindictiveness without any 
(basis of) hostility. Falsehood, O R&ghava, hath never been 
thine, nor can it ever be thine (in the future). Nor yet, O 
foremost of men, canst thou ever even in fancy be (guilty of) 
going after others’ wives, which marreth all religious merit. 
These, O Rama, are by no means in thee. O King’s son, thou 
ever and a day directest thy attentions unto thy own wife. 
And thou art righteous and truthful and doest the will of thy 
sire. In thee are established virtue and truth — and every 
thing j and by help of thy conquered senses, thou, O mighty- 
armed one, art capable of bearing everything. And, O thou 
of a gracious presence, thine is control over sense. The third 
evil that leads men through ignorance to bear hostility towards 
others without any (cause of) hostility, is now present (unto 
thee). Thou hast, O hero, for the protection of the saints 
dwelling in the forest of Dandaka, promised the slaughter 
of Rlkshasas in battle. And it is for this reason that equip- 




IranvakAndam. 



5*3 ' 

pied with bows and arrows, thou hast along with thy brother 
set out for the forest known as Dandaka. Seeing thee set out, 
my mind reflecting on thy truthfulness as well as thy happi- 
ness in this world and welfare in the next, is wrought up 
with anxiety. And, O hero, I do not relish this journey to 
Dandaka. Thereof I will tell thee the reason. Do thou listen 
to me as I tell thee. Bearing bows and arrows in thy hands, 
thou hast come to the wood along with thy brother ; and (it 
may well happen) that seeing grim rangers of the forest, 
thou mayst discharge thy shafts. And even as the vicinity of 
faggots increases the energy of Are, the proximity of (the bow) 
enhances the strength and energy of the Kshatriya. Former- 
ly, O long-armed one, in a sacred wood haunted by beasts 
and birds, there lived a truthful ascetic of a pure person. In- 
tending to disturb his austerities, Sachi’s lord, Indra, 
bearing a sword in his hand, came to the asylum in the guise 
of a warrior. And in that asylum, that excellent scimitar 
was deposited as a trust with that righteous person practis- 
ing asceticism. Receiving that weapon, that ascetic intent 
upon preserving his trust, rangeth the forest, maintaining his 
faith. And intent upon preserving his trust, he goeth no- 
where for procuring fruits and roots without that sword 
deposited with him as a trust. Constantly carrying the sword* 
by degrees, the ascetic, foregoing all thoughts about asceti- 
cism, had his mind involved in fierce sentiments. Thus in 
consequence of bearing that weapon, that ascetic taken up 
with fierce thoughts, losing his sobriety and led astray from 
righteousness, went to hell. This ancient story anent the 
carrying of arms, asserts that even as fire worketh change in: 
a piece of wood, the presence of arms worketh alteration in 
the mind of him bearing them. From affection and the high 
honor in which I hold thee, I merely remind thee of this matter* 

I do not teach thee. Equipped with bows as thou art, thou 
shouldst renounce all thoughts of slaying without hostility the 
R&kshasas residing in Dandaka. Without offence none should 




5*4 



RlMlYANA. 



be stain. — It is the duty of Kshatriya heroes by means of t 
bows to protect persons of subdued souls, come by 
calamity. Where are arms ? And where is the fon 
Where is Kshatriya virtue ? And where is asceticism ? T1 
are opposed to each other, — let us, therefore, honor 
morality that pertains to this (dace. From. following ai 
one's sense gets befouled and deformed. Again going 
AyodhyS, thou wilt observe the duties of Kshatri 
Then my mother-in-law and father-in-law shall ex| 
ience enduring delight, if, having renounced the ktngd 
thou lead the life of an ascetic. Interest springs fi 
righteousnes ; and happiness also results therefr 
One attains everything through righteousness — in 
world the only substantial thing. Repressing self 
diverse restrictions, intelligent people attain righteousnc 
but virtue crowned with felicity, is incapable of being attai 
by following pleasure. O mild one, ever cherishing thy he 
in purity, do thou practise piety in the wood of ascetici 
Everything — the three worlds — are truly known unto tl 
I have spoken this through feminine fickleness. Who 
speak of righteousness unto thee ? Reflecting on and unc 
standing things, do thou along with thy younger brot 
speedily do what thou likest.” 



SECTION x. 

— a i K 

TT EARING VaidehPs words spoken through high reg 
(for her husband), R&ma with his energy enhanced, answe 

Janaka’s daughter, saying, “O noble lady, thou hast spol 
mild words fraught with worth and profit ; and, O Janal 
daughter versed in virtue, thou hast expounded the dut 
of Kshatriyas. What, O exalted one, shall I say ? Thou h 
thyself by thy words (furnished an answer to what 1 1 




iRANYAKlNDAM. 



5*5 



hadst said). Kshatriyas wear bows in order that the word 
‘distressed* may not exist (on earth). O Sita, those ascetics 
of severe vows that are beset with perils in Dandaka, having 
personally come unto me, who am their refuge, have sought 
protection at my hands. Always dwelling in the forest,' sub- 
sisting on fruits and roots, they on account of Rakshasas of 
cruel deeds, do not, O timid one, attain ease. These ascetics 
are devoured by terrible Rakshasas) living on human flesh. 
Being eaten up (by the Rakshasas), the anchorites living in 
the forest of Dandaka— those best of the twice-born ones — 
said unto us — ‘Be thou gracious unto us.* Hearing those 
words of theirs which fell from their lips, I, resolving to act 
in accordance with their request, said,— ‘Be ye propitious/ 
This is surpassing shame unto me that such Vipras who 
themselves are worthy of being sought, seek me. What shall 
I do ? 1 said this in the presence of those twice-born ones. 
Thereat all those that had come, said, ‘We have been, O 
Rama, immensely harassed in the forest of Dandaka by 
Rakshasas wearing shapes at will. Do thou deliver us. These 
irrepressible Rakshasas living on human flesh vanquish us at 
the time of Homa , and on the occasions of Patvas, O sinless 
one. Of the saints and ascetics afflicted by the Rakshasas, 
who are on the search for their refuge, thou art cur best 
refuge. We can by virtue of the energy of our asceticism 
easily destroy the rangers of the night ; but we are loath 
to lose our asceticism earned in a long time. O Righava, 
our austerities are constantly disturbed, and we can hardly 
perform them. Therefore, although sore afflicted and 
devoured by the Rakshasas dwelling in the forest of Dandaka, 
we do not cast our curse on them. Thou along with thy 
brother art our protector : thou art our master in this forest/ 
Having beard these words, I promised my perfect protection* 
unto the saints in the forest of Dandaka, O daughter of 
Janaka. Having promised, I living cannot violate my vow 
concerning the ascetics ; verily truth is ever dear unto me* 




5*6 



RXMXYANA. 



I had rather renounce my life, or thee, O Sift, along with 
Lakshmana, — but by no means my promise made, especially 
unto Br&hmanas. O Videha’s daughter, the protection ol 
the saints is incumbent on me even without any represent- 
ation, — and what (shall I say) when I have promised the 
same ? Thou hast spoken this unto me through affection 
and friendship. I have been well pleased with thee, O SitL 
One doth not instruct another that one doth not bear affection 
to. O beauteous damsel, (what thou hast said) is worthy of 
both thy love and thy race. ” Having said these words unto 
Mithi&’s princess, the beloved Sift, the high-souled R&ma, 
equipped with bows, along with Lakshmana, directed his 
steps towards the inviting woods of asceticism. 



SECTION XI. 



XVAma went first ; in the middle, Sift ; and bear- 
ing a bow in his hand, Lakshmana went in their wake 
And they went with Sift, seeing many mountain-peak$ 
and forests, and delightful streams, and Chakrav&kas' 
haunting river islets, and tanks with lotuses contain-' 
ing aquatic birds, and herds of deer, and horned bui- i 
falos maddened with juices, and boars, and elephants—* 
foes to trees. Having proceeded a long way, when the 
sun was aslant, they together saw a delightful tank 
mcasttfffijr a filled with red and pale lotuses 
graced with herds of elephants, and abounding in aquatid 
cranes, swans and Kadanivas . And in that tank containing 
charming and pleasant waters, they heard sounds of song 
and instrumental music ; b ut n0 one was seen there. 
Thereat, from curiosity, RSma and Lakshmana mighty 
car-warrior — asked an ascetic named Dharmabhrit, say* 




iRANrAKtNDAM; 



5*7 



fag, “Hearing* this mighty wonder, we have been 
worked up with intense curiosity. Do thou tell us what 
this is.” Thus accosted by R&ghava, the ascetic then 
at once began to expatiate over the potency of the pool. 
“This tank goes by the name of Panch£psar£, and is always 
filled with water. It was made 9 O Rlma, by the ascetic 
M&ndakarni,by virtue of his asceticism. In yonder tank, the 
mighty ascetic, living on air, performed signal austerities for 
ten thousand years. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, all the 
deities with Agni at their head, .assembled together, said, 
‘This ascetic wishes to have the position of one of us/ Thus 
all the deities present there were filled with anxiety. Then 
with the view of disturbing his austerities, the deities ordered 
five principal Apsar&s, possessed of the splendour of live 
lightning. And for compassing the end of the celestials, that 
ascetic conversant with the morality and otherwise as well 
of this life as that to come, was brought by those Apsar&s 
under the sway of Madana. And those five Apsar&s (ulti- 
mately) became the wives of the ascetic ; and their hidden 
residence was reared in the pool. And there the five 
Apsarfts living happily, pleased the anchorite, established in 
youth through asceticism and yoga . As thy sport, we hear 
the Sounds of their musical instruments, and the sweet voice 
of their song mixed with the tinklings of their instruments.” 
(Hearing this), the illustrious R&ghava along with his brother 
declared the story narrated by that one of a pure heart to 
be wonderful. Thus conversing, R&ma saw the collection 
of asylums, strewn with Ku^a and bark, and be-girt with 
energy derived from Brahma lore. Entering (the place) along 
with Vaidehi and Lakshmana, the highly famous R^ghava 
dwell there respected by all the ascetics. Having happily 
dwelt in those collections of graceful asylums, honored of 
the Maharshis, K£kutstha by turns went to the hermitages of 
those ascetics with whom that one well versed in arms had 



* Some texts : — Seeing, 





5 i8 



RlMlTANA. 



dwelt before. And Rtghava happily passed his days some- 
where for ten months, somewhere for one year, somewhere 
for four months somewhere for five or six months, somewhere 
for many months, somewhere for a month and a half, — some- 
where for more, somewhere for three months, and somewhere 
for eight. And as R&ma lived in the asylums of the 
ascetics and amused himself through their good graces, ten 
years were passed away (in this way). Having gone round 
the asylums of all the ascetics, RSghava cognizant of 
righteousness returned to the hermitage of Sutikshna. Coming 
to this asylum, respected by the ascetics, that subduer of 
enemies, RSrna, stayed there for a time. Once upon a time, 
as Ktkutstha dwelling in that asylum was seated, he humbly 
observed unto that great ascetic, u l have always heard from 
men speaking on the subject that that foremost of ascetics,' 
the reverend Agastya, lives in this forest. On account of 
the vastness of this forest, I do not know that place. Where 
is the hermitage of that intelligent Maharshi ? For propitiating 
that revered one, I, accompanied by my brother and Sit§, will 
go to Agastya for paying our respects unto the ascetic. This 
great desire is burning in my heart, that 1 should myself 
minister unto that best of anchorets.” Hearing these words 
of the righteous-souled Rama, Sutikhna, well pleased, 
answered Da^aratha’s son, saying, "I also am desirous of 
telling thee this along with Lakshmana. Repair unto 
Agastya in company with SitS, O R&ghava. By luck thou 
hast thyself said this unto me as to thy purpose. I will, O 
Rama, tell thee where that mighty ascetic, Agastya, is. My 
child, go four miles from the hermitage in a southerly direc- 
tion ; and thou wilt come to the hermitage of the brother of 
the auspicious Agastya situated on a land covered with trees, 
graced with Pippali woods, abounding in fruits and flowers, 
charming, and resonant with the notes of various birds. There 
are many tanks containing delightful waters, swarming with 
swans and KSrandavas, and beauteous with Chakravakas. _ 




IRAN YAK AND AM. 



5*9 



ssing a night there, do thou, 0 Rama, in the morning, 
ring a southerly course, go by the skirts of the forest tract, 
.ssing a yojana , thou shalt come upon Agastya’s asylum, 
:ated at a charming woodland graced with many a tree. 
iere Videha’s daughter and Lakshmana shall experience 
light in thy company. O magnanimous one, if thou intend 
see the mighty ascetic, Agastya, in that charming wood- 
id, containing a great many trees, then do thou make up 
y mind to set out this very day.” Hearing these words of 
5 anchoret, Rama, saluting him, along with his brother, set 
for Agastya* s (place) with his younger brother and Sita. 
id, pleasantly proceeding by the way directed by Sutikshna, 
ring picturesque woods, hills resembling clouds, watery 
panses and streams flowing by their path ; R&ma filled with 
light said these words unto Lakshmana, “Surely we see the 
plum of that high-souled one, the ascetic, Agastya* s brother 
pious acts. These trees standing by thousands on 
5 way bending beneath the weight of fruits and 
wers, bear the signs that had been mentioned to me as 
longing to this wood. And from the wood is wafted by 
s wind the pungent odour of ripe pippalis . And here and 
»re are found heaps of fire-wood, and torn Darva are seen, 
the lustre of lapises. And the top of the column of smoke 
longing unto the fire lit in the asylum in this wood, 
pears like the peak of a dark mountain. And twice-born 
es, having performed their ablutions in sacred and retired 
thing places, are offering flowers gathered by themselves, 
placid one, from what I had heard from Sutikshna, this 
>uld appear to be the asylum of Agastya’ s brother. The 
'hteous Agastya it is who, wishing for the welfare of the 
>rlds, destroying by virtue of his austerities a Daitya re- 
nbling Death, hath rendered this quarter habitable. Once 
a time here dwelt together two mighty Asuras, brothers, 
'en to slaughtering Brahmanas — the wily Vatapi and Ilwala. 
earing the form of a Brahmana, and speaking Sanskrit, 
67 




53® 



RlMlVANA. 



\ 



the cruel one used to invite Vipras to a Sr&ddha. And, cook- 
ing his brother wearing the shape of a sheep, he used to feed 
the twice-born ones according to the rites prescribed for 
Srdddhas . Then when the Vipras had fed, Ilwala said, — 
'*0 Vat&pi, come out, uttering a loud sound.” Hearing his 
brother's words, VStapi, bleating like a sheep, came out, riving 
their bodies. In this way, thousands of Br&hmanas gathered 
together, were destroyed by flesh-eating ones wearing shapes 
at will. (And it came to pass that once upon a time) the 
Maharshi Agastya, having been invited to a SrSddha, fed on 
the mighty Asura. Thereupon uttering — ‘Finished* and offer- 
ing water to wash hands with, Ilwala said unto his brother, 
'Come out* \ And, as that brother of Vat5pi, given to slaught- 
ering Vipras was speaking thus, that foremost of ascetics, 
the intelligent Agastya, said with a laugh, 'Where is the 
power of coming out, of the Rlkshasa, thy brother wearing 
the shape of a sheep, who hath gone to Yama's abode ?* 
Hearing his words, from wrath the ranger of the night pre- 
pared to assail the ascetic, and he rushed against that fore* 
most of the twice-born ones. And, being consumed by that 
ascetic of flaming energy with his eyes resembling firfc, the 
R&kshasa met his end. This asylum graced with pools and 
groves belongs to the brother of him who hath performed 
this arduous feat from compassion for the Vipras*. As 
R3ma was thus conversing with SumitrSL’s son, the sun 
set and evening approached. Then, duly performing his 
afternoon adorations along with his brother, R£ma entered 
the hermitage, and saluted the ascetic. Well received by the 
ascetic, R&ghava spent there a night, eating fruits and roots. 
When the night had passed away, and the solar disc arose, 
Righava greeted Agastya’s brother, saying, "O reverend 
Sir, I salute thee. I have pleasantly passed the night. I greet 
thee j I shall go to behold my preceptor, thy elder brother." 
Thereat, on the ascetic’s saying, 'Go thou/ the descendant of 
Raghu went away by the prescribed route. And R&ma viewed 

V 




IRANYAKINDAM 53* 

the forest, and Nih&ras, and Panamas, and Salas, Vanjulas 
and Tinisas, and Chirivilwas, and Madhukas. and Vilvas, and 
Tindukas, — all in full flower, and graced with blossoming 
creepers, and trees in the wood by hundreds, roughly handled 
by elephants with their trunks, and graced by monkeys, and 
resounding with the voices of an hundred maddened warblers. 
Then the lotus-eyed R£ma said unto that enhancer of auspi- 
ciousness, the heroic Lakshmana, who was by him, and was 
following him at his back, “The leaves of these trees are 
glossy, and the beasts and birds are mild, even as (we had 
been told). The asylum of the pure-hearted Maharshi must 
not be far. This asylum capable of removing the fatigue of 
the weary, belonging to him that is known among men as 
Agastya by his own acts, is seen, with the (neighbouring 
woods) filled with smoke, and itself decorated with bark and 
wreaths, containing herds of mild deer, and ringing with the 
notes of various birds. This is the asylum of that pious one, 
who destroying (the Asura resembling) Death, hath, desirous 
of the welfare of mankind, rendered the Southern quarter 
habitable, and through whose potency the RSkshasas from 
fear barely cast their eyes in this direction, but do not ap- 
proach. Ever since that one of pious ways possessed himself 
of this quarter, the rangers of the night have foregone their 
hostility, and assumed a peaceful attitude. This South- 
ern quarter rendered safe (by Agastya), and incapable of being 
harassed by those ones of tortuous ways, is celebrated over 
the three worlds in conection with the name of the reverend 
ascetic. And this graceful asylum ranged by mild beasts 
belongs to that long-lived one of renowned achievements — 
Agastya — in obedience to whose command, the Vindhya 
mountain — foremost of its kind — w'hich had always obstructed 
the way of the Sun, doth not increase. This pious one 
honored of men, ever engaged in the welfare of the righteous, 
shall do good unto us. who have come to him. I shall adore 
the mighty ascetic, Agastya, and, O mild one, O master, here 




53 * 



rImXfana. 



pass away the remainder of the term of my banishm 
Here celestials with the Gandharbas, and Siddhas and < 
nent saints, observing restrictions in respect of food, 
adore Agastya. And the ascetic is such that a liar cai 
live here, nor a cunning or a crafty person, nor a wicked wi 
nor one that is given to unrighteousness. And ado 
righteousness, celestials, and Yakshas, and Nagas, and bi 
live here restricting their fare. And high-souled Sid< 
and eminent saints, renouncing their bodies, repair to 
celestial regions in cars resembling the sun. And ad 
by auspicious individuals, the deities here confer on them 
states of Yakshas and celestials, and divers kingdoms 
Sumitr&’s son, entering the asylum before us, do thou 
nounce unto the saints that I along with Sita, have arr 
here.” 



SECTION XII. 



HAVING entered the asylum, RSghava’s you 
brother, Lakshmana, coming to a disciple of Agastva, sj 
unto him, saying, “There was a king, named Da^ar; 
llis eldest son, the strong Rama, hath come (to this asy 
along with his wife, Sita, for seeing the ascetic . — Ks 
Lakshmana, I am his younger brother, obedient and dev 
to him. — Thou mayst have heard of it. Having entered 
horrid forest, in consonance with the mandate of our 
we desire to see the reverend one. Tell this unto h 
Hearing Lakshmana s words, that ascetic, saying. “So be 
entered the chamber of the sacrificial fire, for the pur 
of communicating (the news unto Agastya). Entering 
Agastva’s beloved disciple, with joined hands communic 
unto that foremost of ascetics, incapable of being repress 

* Some texts ; — Effulgent. 




XranfakXndam. 



533 



exactly what Lakshmana had told him, — “For Seeing the 
reverend one, and serving him as well, those subduers of 
their foes, Da^aratha’s sons, Rama and Lakshmana, accom- 
panied by Sita, have entered this asylum. It now behoves 
thee to command what is to be done next.” Hearing from 
his disciple that Rama had come along with Lakshmana 
and the highly virtuous Vaidehi, Agastya said, “By luck it 
is that after a long time, Rama hath come to see me. I had 
mentally wished for his arrival. Go thou ; and let Rama, 
having been respectfully received, come before me. Why 
hast thou not brought him thyself ?” Thus addressed by the 
high-souled and righteous ascetic, the disciple saluting him, 
with joined hands, said, “So be it.” Then issuing out, the 
disciple said unto Lakshmana, “Where is Rama ? Let him 
come and enter in.” Threat, going to the asylum in company 
with the disciple (of Agastya), Lakshmana showed unto him 
Kakutstha and the daughter of Janaka, Sit5. Then joyfully 
communicating unto Rama the words of the reverend one, 
the disciple (of Agastya) duly took in that one worthy of 
being honored. And seeing the asylum teeming with mild 
deer, Rama entered in w*ith Lakshmana and Sita. And there 
Rama beheld the place of BrahmS, and that of Agni, — that of 
Vishnu, and that of the great Indra, the place of Vivasvvat, 
and that of Soma, and that of Bhaga, and that of DhSta and 
VidhatSi, and that of Vayu, and that of the high-souled 
Varuna having the noose in his hand, and that of Gayatrl 
and that of the Vasus, and that of the monarch of the Ndgas, 
and that of Garura, and that of Kartikeya, and that of Dharma. 
And it came to pass that, surrounded by his disciples, the 
ascetic came (before Rama). And Rama saw that one of 
flaming energy at the head of the ascetics ; and the here 
said unto Lakshmana, enhancer of auspiciousness, “O 
Lakshmana, the revered saint, Agastya, is coming out. I 
recognize that mass of asceticism by a certain kind of majesty 
(that characterizes him).” Having said this touching Agastya* 




534 



RlMlYANA. 



of the splendour of the sun, that son of Raghu took hold 
of his feet. Then, having paid him homage, Rima with 
joined hands stood there in company with Videha’s daughter, 
Sita, and Lakshmana. Thereat, embracing Rama and honor- 
ing him with water and a seat, and asking him questions 
anent his welfare, the saint said, “Welcome !” Offering 
oblations unto the fire, and presenting Arghya unto the 
guests, and paying them homage, that ascetic entertained 
them with food in accordance with the V&nasprastha mode 
of life ; and then first sitting down, that foremost of ascetics, 
the pious Agastya, addressed R&ma cognizant of righteous- 
ness, staying with joined hands, “O KSkutstha, if an ascetic 
acts otherwise (in respect of a guest,) he in the next 
world feeds on his own flesh, like a false witness. The 
sovereign of all the worlds, righteous, a mighty car warrior, 
worthy of being honored and worshipped, thou hast become 
our beloved guest.” Having said this, Agastya, according to 
his desire, worshipping Raghava with fruits, roots and flowers, 
said unto him, “O foremost of men, this mighty, celestial bow 
belonging unto Vishnu, and constructed by VicwakarmS, 
and this best of arrows (named) Brahmadatta, infallible 
and resembling the sun, and this inexhaustible couple of 
quivers filled with sharpened shafts, like unto flaming fire; 
were granted unto me by the mighty Indra. And here il 
this mighty golden scabbard, and this sword decked 
in gold. Having, O Rima, slain the mighty Asuns 
with this bow, Vishnu in days of yore in battle 
secured the effulgent Fortune of the celestials. O bet- 
tower of honor, do thou for securing victory, take this; 
bow, these quivers, this arrow, and this scimitar, like the 
holder of the thunderbolt, taking the same” Having said this, 
that highly energetic one, the reverend Agastya, consigning 
unto R2ma all those weapons, again said. 



iRANlAKlNDAM. 



535 



SECTION XIII. 



0 Rama, I am pleased with thee ; good betide thee ! 
And, O Lakshmana, I am gratified by thee. Ye are 
in trouble in consequence of the great fatigue that ye 
have undergone on the way. And Janaka's daughter, the 
noble Maithili, is evidently eager (for rest). Of tender years 
and unknown to hardship, she hath come to the forest rife 
with troubles, being urged by the love she bears unto her lord. 
Do thou, O R&ma, conduct thyself so, that Sit§. may find a 
pleasant time of it. By following thee to the forest, it is a 
hard task that she is performing. O son of Raghu, this hath 
been the nature of the fair sex from the commencement of 
creation, that they gladden him that is well off, and forsake 
a person in adversity. And women imitate the instability of 
lightning, the sharpness of weapons, and the celerity of Garura 
and the wind*. But this wife of thine is absolutely free from 
all these defects ; she is worthy of being extolled and the 
foremost of those devoted to their lord, like Arundhati 
among the gods. This region, O R&ma, will be adorned, 
since, O subduer of enemies, thou along with Vaidehi and 
Sumitr&’s son, wilt dwell here. ,, Thus addressed by the ascetic, 
R&ghava, joining his hands, humbly observed unto that saint 
resembling flaming fire, “ Blessed and beholden am I, since 
the foremost of ascetics is gratified with my merits as well as 
with those of my brother and wife. Do thou now r direct me to 
a country well watered, and abounding in woods, where rear- 
ing an asylum, I may dwell delightfully and pleasantly.* 
Hearing R&ma’s words, that best of ascetics, reflecting for a 
while, spoke these excellent words, “Two Yojanas hence, my 
child, is a region abounding in fruits and roots, containing 

• The commentator explains : — They imitate the lightning in changing 
their residence, the sharpness of weapons in severing affection, and the celerity 
of Garura or the wind in doing wrong. — T. 





53 6 



RjiMlYANA . 



countless deer, and Jbeautiful — known by the name of Pancha- 
vati. Repairing thither, do thou, rearing an asylum, pass 
thy time pleasantly in company with Sumitra’s son, duly doing 
the mandate of thy sire. O sinless one, all this news relating 
to thyself, has from affection been known to me through the 
potency of my asceticism, as also that relating to Da^aratha. 
Although thou hast promised to dwell with me in this ascetic 
grove, yet by virtue of my asceticism I know the desire that is 
in thy heart. I therefore tell thee, repair to Panchavati.' That 
is a charming woodland, and there Mithila’s daughter shall 
dwell with delight. And that tract is worthy of all praise, 
and, O RSghava, it is not distant from here. — It is in the 
vicinity of the Godavari. Mithila’s daughter shall live there 
agreeably. And that spot abounds in fruits and roots, is 
frequented by various fowls, is retired, O mighty-armed one, 
and is sacred and beautiful. And thou of pure ways, and 
competent to protect the ascetics, shall, O Rama, protect 
them. O hero, yonder is the mighty wood of Madhukas. 
Directing thy course to the asylum of Nagrodha trees, go by 
the north of this Madhuka wood. Then arriving at a spot hard 
by a hill, (thou wilt) come upon the celebrated Panchavati, 
crowned with blossoming woods.” Thus accosted by Agastya, 
Rama along with Sumitra’s son, honouring the truth-speaking 
saint, greeted him. Then, having saluted his feet, they, taking 
the saint’s permission, set out along with Sita for the hermit- 
age of Panchavati. And, taking their bows and quivers those 
sons of the king, of undiminished martial virtue, with intent 
minds bent their course to Panchavati by the way laid down 
by the Maharshi. 




An 4 NY A KAND A M. 



537 



SECTION XIV. 



As he was proceeding to Panchavati, Raghu’s son saw a 
huge-bodied vulture of terrible prowess. And seeing him in 
the forest, the exalted Rama and Lakshmana, as they were 
conversing With each other, knowing the bird to be (in reality) 
a Rakshasa, asked him, saying, "Who art thou ?” There- 
upon, in soft and sweet words, he, pleasing them, said, "My 
child, know me for a friend of thy father." Knowing him to 
be a friend of his sire, RSghava paid him homage, and' 
enquired for his name and lineage. Hearing R&ma’s words, 
he mentioned his own lineage, and related the origin of all 
beings. “O mighty-armed one, I shall describe (unto thee) 
from the very beginning the (history of) those that were 
Prajapatis in days of yore. Listen, O RSghava. Of these, 
the first is Kardama, then Vikrita, and then Sesha, Sancraya, 
the powerful Vahuputra, Sthinu, Marichi, Atri, the mighty 
Kratu, Pulastya, Angira, Pracheta, Pulaha, Daksha, 
Vivaswat, Arishtanemi, O Rlghava, and the exceedingly 
energetic Ka^yapa. These had the west. The PrajSipati 
Daksha, it hath been heard by us, O R5ma, had sixty famous 
and illustrious daughters. Of these Ka$yapa wed eight, 
with elegant waists; — Aditi, Diti, Danu, KalikS* Tamr5, 
KrodhavasS, Manu and AnalS. Then, well pleased, Ka^yapa 
again said unto those damsels, "Do thou bring forth sons like 
unto myself, who shall be lords of the three worlds.* There- 
at, Aditi, O R&ma, Diti, Danu, and K5lik5, O mighty-armed 
one, consented, — the rest were of another mind. And of 
Aditi were born thirty-three deities, O repressor of thy foes, 
vis., the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, and the Aswinas, O 
subduer of enemies. And, my child, Diti gave birth to those 
sons, the renowned Daityas. Formerly, this earth girt with 
seas was in the possession of these. And, O vanquisher of 



68 



Some texts : — Kalaha.—T. 




53 * 



RlMlYAXA. 



thy foes, Danugave birth to a son, named, Afwagriva. And 
K&lik& brought forth 1 Naraka and K&laka. And TSmra gave 
birth to these five daughters celebrated in the world, — 
Kraunchi, Bh&si, Syeni, Dhritarshtri, and Suki. And Kraun- 
chi gave birth to the Ulukas, and BhSsi, to Bh3sas, and 
Syeni to hawks and vultures possessed of energy ; and 
Dhritarashtri to swans, all kinds of Kalahansas, and 
ChakravSkas, and that damsel, Suki, to NatS. And 
Vinata was Nata’s daughter. And KrodhavasS, O RSraa, 
brought forth ten daughters, viz., Mrigi, MrigamandS, Hari, 
BhadramadS, MSLtangi, Sarduli, SwetS, Surabhi crowned 
with every (auspicious mark), SurasS and KadrukS. And, 
thou foremost of the best pf men, Mrigi’s sons were 
all the deer, and those of MrigamandS. were bears, SrimSras 
and Chamaras. And Bhadramad& bore one daughter, IrSvati. 
And Irivati's son is the mighty elephant, who is the lord of the 
worlds. And Hari’s sons are lions and the nimble monkeys. 
And SSrduli brought forth as her sons, GolSngulas, and 
tigers ; and the offspring of Matangi were mad elephants, 
O best of men. And Sweta, O Kakutstha, gave birth to 
the elephants of the cardinal points. And, O Rama, 
Surabhi gave birth unto two daughters — the famous Rohini, 
and Gandharbi. Rohini produced kine, and the sons of 
Gandharbi are horses. And SurasSL, O Rama, gave birth to 
Nagas, and Kadru, to Pannagas. And KS^yapa's other 
wife Manu begot mankind — BrShmanas, Kshatriyas, 

Vaipyas, and Sudras. From the mouth, it is known, 
sprang BrShmanas, from the breast, Kshatriyas, from the 
thighs, Vaipyas, and from the feet, Sudras. And Anala pro- 
duced all trees bearing sacred fruits. Vinata (was) Suki's 
grand-daughter, and Kadru, Surasa’s aunt. And Kadru gave 
birth to a thousand Nagas with the holder of the Earth. And 
VinatSL brought forth two sons, — Garura, and Aruna. And 
from Aruna sprang myself and my elder brother Samp&ti. O 
subduer of enemies, know me for JatSyu, the son of Syeni. 




iRANYAKXNDAM. 



539 



If thou will, I shall become thy help during thy abode (in the 
woods). And, O child, I shall protect SitS. when thou shalt 
go out along with Lakshmana.” There RSghava paying homage 
unto Jat3Lyu, and embracing him joyfully, bent low; and that 
self-possessed one listened to the story of JatSyu's friend- 
ship with his father, as related by him repeatedly. Then 
consigning unto that bird of exceeding strength, MithiUL's 
daughter, Sit&, R§ma accompanied by Lakshmana went to 
Panchavati, destroying his foes and protecting the worlds. 



SECTION XV. 



Then repairing to Panchavati filled with various animals 
and beasts of prey, R&ma remarked unto his brother of flam- 
ing energy, "(Now) we have come to the place to which we 
had been directed by the ascetic. This, O amiable one, is 
Panchavati furnished with blossoming woods. Do thou cast 
thy eyes around this forest, and (ascertain) what spot shall 
suit our asylum. Do thou find out such a place in the vici- 
nity of a tank where thyself Sita and I may dwell happily, 
which is graced with the garniture of woods and delightful 
with liquid lapses, and whose neighbourhood yeilds fuel, 
flowers, Ku^a and water.” Thus addressed by Rama, Laksh- 
mana with joined hands, said unto Kakutstha in the presence 
of Sita, “O Kakutstha, even if I were to stay with thee for 
an hundred years, I shall remain thy servant. Thyself 
selecting some beauteous spot, do thou tell me — ‘Construct 
(an asylum). 1 " Well pleased with the words of Lakshmana, 
that highly effulgent one, after due reflection, selected a site 
having every recommendation. Going to that romantic spot 
for rearing an asylum, Rama, taking the hand of Sumitr&'s 
son in his, said unto him, "This place is level, graceful, and 
surrounded with blossoming trees. Do thou duly construct 




540 



RlMlVANA. 



an asylum at this spot. Hard by is seen a beautiful pool, 
embellished with lotuses, resembling the sun, and breathing 
balmy perfume. And, as told by that pure-hearted ascetic, 
Agastya, this is the graceful Godavari, bordered by flowering 
trees; — swarming with swans and K&randavas, delighted with 
Chakrav&kas ; thronged with herds of deer*, not far, yet not 
so very near. And resounding with the cries of peacocks ; 
charming ; elevated ; containing full many a cave ; do thou, O 
amiable one, behold these hills, covered with trees in full 
flower; and they are shining like elephants painted with 
diverse colors by persons with the utmost care ; adorned 
with Silas, palmyras, Tamilas, dates Panasas, NivSras, 
Tinisas, and Punnigas. And covered with mangos, and 
Tilakas, and Ketakas, and Champakas, and trees entwined 
by flowers and herbs and plants ; and containing Syandanas, 
sandals, Nipas, Panasas, Lakuchas, Dhavas, A^wakarnas* 
Khadiras, Samis, Kinsukas and Patalas. This spot is sacred 
— this spot is charming — this spot abounds in beasts and 
birds. Here will I dwell, O Sumitri’s son, in company with 
this birdt. ,, Thus addressed by Rima, the exceedingly 
powerful Lakshmana, slayer of hostile heroes, in a short time 
raised an asylum for his brother. And the exceedingly stout 
Lakshmana created there for Righava a spacious hut thatched 
with leaves made of clay, furnished with pillars, construct- 
ed with long bamboos, graceful, — spread with Sami boughs ; 
tightly fastened with strong cords ; covered with Ku^, 
reeds, and leaves ; with its floor well leveled ; and charming; 
beautiful to look at, and exceedingly excellent. And then 
going to the river Godavari, the lovely Lakshmana, perform- ' 
ing his bath, and securing lotuses and fruits, came back (to 
the asylum). Then offering flowers, and duly performing 
rites for the peace (of the habitation), Lakshmana showed 
the asylum which he had made unto Rama. Seeing the 

* Come to slake their thirst. — R&m&yana. — T. 

t Jat£yu. — T. 




1RANVAKINDAM. 



54i 



beautiful asylum along with Sita, RSghava experienced high 
raptures. And joyfully embracing Lakshmana with his arms, 
R2ma said these exceedingly calm and solemn words, “Pleased 
am I with thee. Thou hast done a great deed, my brother ; 
for which I have granted thee my embrace by way of re- 
ward. While thou, his son, skilled in reading thought, 
grateful, and cognizant of righteousness art alive, 0 Laksh- 
mana, my father is not dead.” Having said this unto Laksh- 
mana, RSghava-the enhancer of auspiciousness — experiencing 
felicity , began to dwell happily in that region filled with fruits. 
And ministered unto by Sita and Lakshmana, that righteous 
one lived there, like the immortals in heaven. 



SECTION XVI. 



Al$ the high-souled Righava was dwelling there peace- 
fully, after autumn had departed, the welcome winter com- 
menced. And it came to pass that once on a time, when the 
night had passed away and day broke, that son of Raghu 
went to the romantic river GodJvari for performing his bath. 
And as the humble son of SumitrS Rama’s puissant brother 
bearing a water pitcher in his hand was following Rama along 
with Sita at his back, the former said unto Rama, “O sweet- 
speeched one, now is come that season which thou hast ever 
held dear; and as if decorated by which comeson the entire 
auspicious year. Now people have their persons rendered 
rough from dew ; the earth is replenished with corn ; water 
is difficult of being used ; and fire becomes enjoyable. And 
men having worshipped the gods and the Pitris by celebrating 
Agrayana on the occasion of partaking new rice, have at 
this season, their sins purged off. The provinces overflow 
with food, and abound in milk and articles prepared there- 
from ; and kings bent on conquest, range about for surveying 




54a 



it Ami r ana . 



them. And on the sun having veered steadily to the quarter 
presided over by the Destroyer*, the north appears like a 
female without her tilaka\. Naturally abounding in snow, 
and now having the sun at a great distance, the mountain 
HimavftnJ justly beareth that name. At miday the days are 
delightful to a degree to range in, feel highly agreeable, and 
have pleasant suns ; while shade and water are uncomfort- 
able. And the days now have mild suns, are covered 
with dew, severely cold, with the forests remaining idle§, 
and the lotuses destroyed by frost. And now at night people 
cannot lie down in unsheltered places ; and the nights are 
inferred from the presence of PushySL. And at night the 
atmosphere (being covered with vapour) looks brown ; and it 
is bitter cold then ; and the hours are long. And the good 
fortune of the Moon hath fallen to the Sun ; and the disc of 
the former is reddish with vapour; and like unto a glass 
breathed upon, it doth not shine clearly. And the moonlight 
furnished by vapour doth not appear pleasant ; and like Sit5 
pallid because of (exposure to) sunshine, is perceptible, but 
doth not look beauteous. And at this season the western 
wind naturally of gelid feel, being permeated at present with 
cold, blows with double coldness.' And the forests enveloped 
in mist, and stocked with wheat and barley, look brilliant at 
sunrise, with Kraunchas and cranes crying (in chorus). 
Golden-hued paddy slightly inclined, appear graceful, with 
their heads like unto date-flowers filled with rice. And the 
sun although high advanced, yet having its rays cover- 
ed with thick mist, appeareth like the moon. And feeble 
at the first part of the day, and of agreeable touch at mid-day, 

♦ i. e . — The South. — T. 

f A mark made with colored earths or unguents upon the forehead and 
between the eye-brows either by way of ornament or a sectarial distinc- 
tion. — T. 

X Himavan means having snow. — T. 

§ ‘Of antres vast and deserts idle.' Othello. Although not in common use, 
the word is very picturesque, and hence the adoption. — T. 





iRANVAKlNDAM. 



543 



the sunshine, being surcharged with mist, appeareth palish 
over the face of the earth. And in the woods, swards cover- 
ed with green grass, and with dew-drops on it, look hand- 
some on the morning sun brightening it up. Anil wild 
elephants waxing exceedingly thirsty, draw away their trunks, 
just as they touch beautifully clear and cold water. And 
those aquatic fowls seated by, do not dip themselves in the 
water, like unto cravens shunning fight. And the rows of 
trees, shorn of their blossoms, on being enveloped with dew 
at night and mist at morn, look as if they were fast asleep. 
And the streams appear with their waters enveloped in 
vapour, and the cranes, perceived through their cries, and their 
banks having their sands wet. And what on account of the 
snow-fall, what of the mildness of the sun, and what through 
the cold, water even when it is on a mountain top, tastes 
sweet. And lotuses afflicted by the cold, with the stalks only 
left, and with their petals dropping down and their pericarps 
and filaments shrivelled up, do not appear beautiful. And, 
O foremost of men, at this season, influenced by regard for 
thee, Bharata undergoing affliction of spirit, is performing 
mortifications in the city. And forsaking kingdom, and 
dignity, and the many and various enjoyments, Bharata pract- 
ising asceticism and restraining himself in respect of food, 
in this winter lieth down on the bare earth. And he also, for 
certain, at this hour of the day, surrounded by his subjects, 
daily w T endeth to the river Sarayu for performing his ablutions. 
Brought up in luxury, and exceedingly tender, how can he, 
afflicted with cold, perform his ablutions during the latter 
part of the night? Of eyes resembling lotus petals, grey- 
hued, endued with grace, with a navel depressed, and mighty, 
Bharata understandeth righteousness, is truth-speaking, of 
restrained senses (in respect of others' wives) and also of 
subdued senses. And he speaketh fair, and is sweet-tempered, 
and long-armed and the vanquisher of foes. And renounc- 
ing various pleasures, he hath devoted himself unto the noble 




544 



rAm\ FAN A. 



one. Thy high-souled brother hath secured heaven, si 
he, resorting to asceticism, is imitating thee that residen 
the woods. The saying that people follow their mo 
and not their father, is falsified in the case of Bharata. F 
can mother Kaikeyi, whose husband is Da^aratha and son 
righteous Bharata, have such crooked way ?" As the virti 
Lakshmana was speaking thus from affection, R5gh 
not bearing the blame cast upon his mother (Kaikeyi), s 
“My brother, thou shouldst by no means, tax our sec 
mother. Do thou talk of that lord of the Ikshw£ku r 
Bharata. Albeit my mind is firm as regards my sojour 
the woods, yet is my mind unsteady, being inflamed t 
affection for Bharata. I remember his dear sweet wc 
taking the heart, resembling ambrosia, filling the soul i 
delight. When shall I, O son of Raghu, meet with the h 
souled Bharata, and the heroic Satrughna, and thysel 
Having bewailed thus, Kakutstha, coming to the river G< 
vari, there performed his ablutions in company with 
younger brother and SitSL. Then having offered his ad< 
tions with water unto the gods and the Pitris, those sin 
ones hymed the risen sun as well as the celestials. Ha\ 
with Sit& as the second and Lakshmana, performed his b 
R&ma looked beautiful like that lord the reverend Rudr 
company with Nandi and the daughter of the king of mouta 



SECTION XVII. 



Having bathed, Rama, Site and Sumitr&’s son wen 
their own asylum from the banks of the GodSvari. Arm 
at the asylum, Raghava along with Lakshmana, perform 
his morning devotions, entered the cottage. And hone 
of the Maharshis, R&ma happily dwelt in that cottage ; ; 



Thyself, the meaning is evident when shall we all meet together.— T. 




XranfakXndam. 



545 



ated with Sit& that migty-armed one looked like the Moon 
conjunction with Chitra. And he carried bn various con- 
rse with his brother Lakshmana. As R&ma was thus seated 
ith his mind engrossed in that talk, A R&kshasi came to 
at region at her will. And that one named SurpanakhS, 
ster unto the ten-necked Rikshasa, coming upon R£ma, saw 
m like a celestial, having a leonine chest, mighty-arms, 
td expansive eyes resembling lotus leaves, with the power- 
I gait of the elephant, wearing a head of matted locks, with 
resplendent countenance, bearing regal marks. And be- 
dding R£ma dark-blue like the lotus, and becoming like 
andarpa himself, and resembling Indra, the RSkshasi was 
addened with desire. R&ma was graced with a beauteous 
untenance, that R&kshas had a hedeous face ; Rama had 
slender waist, she had a huge abdomen ; he* had expansive 
res, she had terrible eyes ; he was gifted with an elegant 
ad of hair, she had coppery hair ; Raima was of a 
:ar presence, she was of an unsightly presence ; 
Ima had a sonorous voice, she had a hedeous voice ; 
Ima was youthful, the Rlkshasi was an old hag ; Rama 
id mellifluous accents, she had harsh accents ; Rlma 
as ever abiding by justice, she was unruly ; Rlma 
is handsome, she was ugly. That Rlkshasi being 
rought up with passion addressed Rlma saying “Wear 
g matted locks, and equipped with bows and arrows, 
iy hast thou along with thy wife come to this 
gion haunted by Rlkshasas? It behoveth thee to say 
lat the object of thy visit is.” Thus accosted by the 
ikshasi, Surpanakhl, that subduer of his foes from sincerity 
disposition began to relate everything: — “There was a 
ng named Da£aratha endeued with the prowess of a celes- 
l 1. I am his eldest son known among men by the name of 
ima. This is my younger brother (named) Lakshmana, 
fer)serving me. This is my wife, known by the name of 
tl. Commanded by my father and mother, I in obedience 
69 




546 



RlMlYANA. 



to their mandate, desirous of acquiring religious merits, hat 
for the purpose of securing righteousness, come to tt 
forest for dwelling here. I also am anxious to know the 
Whose daughter art thou ? And what is thy name, and wh 
thy lineage ? Possessed of a captivating form, thou appea 
est to me as a R&kshasi. Tell me truly why thou hast con 
here.” Hearing these words the R&kshasi, afflicted with lu 
said, “Listen, O Rama. I will relate everything truly, 
am a Rakshasi, capable of wearing shapes at will. My nan 
is Surpanakha. Striking terror into the hearts of all, f ran; 
this forest alone. My brother is named Rivana.* Th< 
mayst have heard of him. And he that is given to long sl« 
— the mighty Kumbhakarna, the righteous Bibhishana, wl 
never serves the Rakshasas, and the brothers Khara ai 
Dushana renowned in conflict (are also my brothers). 
Rama, I have surpassed them all (in prowess). At first sig 
of thee, I approach thee, thou best of men, as my husban 
with (feelings of) love. 1 am endeued with power, and ran; 
about at will by virtue of my strength. Become my husbai 
for ever and a day. What wilt thou do with SiUk ? E 
formed and unsightly, she is not worthy of thee. I am- fit i 
thee. Do thou look upon me as a wife. This unsight 
grim unchaste and human one with a lean abdomen, wil 
devour up, along with this brother of thine. Then havi 
thy wish, in company with me, thou wilt range the Dandak 
surveying the various mountain summits and forests.” Tl 
addressed, K&kutstha having charming eyes, well skill 
in speech, with a smile, began to speak thus. 

* Another reading is : my brother is named Havana — a Rakshasa , and 
lord of Rakshasas. He is the son of Viasavan. Thou mayst have kern* 
him. — T. 





IRANFAKXNDAM. 547 

SECTION XVIII. 



W ITH a smile, Rima jestingly addressed SurpanakhA 
f who had been ensnared in the noose of love, in soft words, 
:: saying, “Gentle one, I am already wedded ; this is my be- 
s loved wife. To females like unto thee co-wife-hood is 
# exceedingly miserable. This young brother of mine is good- 
i looking, and is of an excellent character ; he is graceful, and 
; is still unwived. The powerful one is named Lakshmana. 

! He hath not yet tested the pleasures of a wife’s company, and 
i is desirous of having a spouse. And he is youthful and of 
„ an inviting presence. He will become a fit husband for 
thee, considering this thy beauty. O thou of expansive eyes, 
l seek this brother of mine as thy husband, even as the solar 
b beam seeks Meru. (By doing so), thou O supremely beautiful 
i damsel, wilt not have to fear a co-wife.” Having been thus 
: addressed by RAma, the RAkshasi intoxicated with lust, at 
once leaving RAma, spake unto Lakshmana, saying, “I am fit 
to be thy wife possessed of transcendental grace, having 
regard to this beauty of thine. And with me thou wilt happi- 
ly range these Dandakas.” Thus accosted by the RAkshasi, 
SumitrA’s son, Lakshmana versed in speech, with a smile 
appropriately observed unto SurpanakhA, “Why wishest thou 
to be the servant of me who am a servant myself ?* O lotus- 
hued one, I am dependant on my noble brother, O thou of 
expansive eyes, be thou securing the summum bonum , with 
a joyful heart, become, O superbly beautiful wench, the 
younger wife of the noble one of great good fortune. Re- 
nouncing this frightful, unchaste,hideous, old wife possessed of 
a lean abdomen ; he will devote himself unto thee. O paragon 
amoug damsels, O supremely charming lady, what man 
possessed of discernment, passing by such grace, would bear 

* The text is difficult to render literally : — Why wishest thou to be the 
female servant of me who am myself a male servant. — T. 




548 



jRAmAFAiVA. 



affection to a human female ?” Thus accosted by Lakshmana, 
that hideous one having a lean abdomen being incapable of 
understanding jest, took his words as true. Thereupon as 
that subduer of enemies, the irrepressible R&ma, was seated 
in the cottage in company with Sit&, the R&kshasi, transported 
with lust, said unto him, “Forsaking this deformed, unchaste, 
horrible old wife of thine possessed of a lean abdomen, thou 
dost not regard me. To-day, thou looking on, I shall eat up 
this human female. And I shall, rid of a co-wife, happily 
range with thee. ,, Having said this, even as a mighty meteor 
striketh Rohini, that one having eyes resembling live coals; 
waxing exceedingly enraged, rushed towards that (damsel) 
with the eyes of a doe. Thereupon, hindering the R&kshasi 
resembling the noose of death, as she was rushing on, the 
mighty R&ma, growing wroth, said unto L&kshmana, “O 
Saumitrif, what is the good of jesting with a base and 
wicked one ? No use of doing it. Look, O amiable one, 
VaidehiJ is well nigh dead. It behoves thee, O foremost of 
men, to deform this frightful, unchaste R&kshasi of a huge 
abdomen, transported with lust. ,, Thus desired the exceed- 
ingly strong Lakshmana, fired with wrath, taking out his 
sword, in the sight of R&ma, cut off her nose and ears. Her 
ears and nose cut off, the terrible Surpanakh&, uttering fright- 
ful cries, fled amain into the forest whence she had come. 
And being deformed, and covered with gore, the dreadful 
Rlkshasi sent up many a roar, like clouds rumbling in the 
rains. And bleeding profusely, the grimvisaged R&kshasi, 
lifting up her arms, and roaring, entered the mighty forest. 
Then, having been deformed, (the Rakshasi) approaching, 
her brother of firece energy, Khara, come to Janasthina, (seat- 
ed surrounded by numbers of Rakshasas), fell down to the 

f We are obliged to use this epithet as it is in order to prevent the too 
frequent recurrence of Sumitra's son. — T. 

t Videka’s daughter. We retain this epithet also for the reason assigned 
above. — T. 





iRANFAKlNDAM. 



549 



earth, even as the thunder-bolt bursts from the sky. Then 
that sister of Khara, bathed in blood, and deprived of her 
senses through fright, related all about RSLma’s arrival at the 
forest along with Lakshmana and his own wife, as well as the 
circumstances connected with her being deformed. 



SECTION XIX. 



Seeing his sister deformed, and covered with blood, 
fallen on the ground, the R£kshasa, Khara, fired with wrath 
asked her, saying, “Arise ! Leave off fear and amazement. 
Tell me plainly by whom thou hast been thus deformed. Who 
is it that with his finger-end hath by way of sport hurt 
a black venomous snake that was innocent ? He that 
coming in contact with thee hath to-day drunk virulent 
poison, winding a fatal noose round about his neck, knoweth 
it not through ignorance. Endowed with strength and prow- 
ess, ranging about at will, wearing shapes at pleasure, and 
resembling the destroyer himself, going to whom hast thou 
come by this condition ? Who among the gods, Gandharbas 
or creatures or the high souled saints is of such mighty ener- 
gy as to have deformed thee ? In this world I do not see 
him that w r ould do me wrong. Even as a crane afflicted with 
thirst appropriateth milk mixed in water (leaving the latter 
out), so by means of fleet and life-destroying shafts will 
I among the immortals take the life of that chastiser of 
Pika, the thousand-eyed mighty Indra. The frothy blood of 
whom, having his marrow pierced (by me) and slain by me 
in battle, doth the Earth wish to drink J Tearing off flesh 
from the corpse of whom slain by me in conflict, shall the 
birds so joyfully feed on it ? Him, whom I shall wrong 
mightily, neither the gods, nor the Gandharbas, nor the 
Pi^Schas*, nor the R&kshasas, will be able to rescue in 



A kind of foul spirits. — T. 



55 <> 



RXMlYANA. 



fierce encounter. Recovering by degrees thy sense, it 
hoves thee to tell me what individual it was of execr 
character, who by his prowess, hath humbled thee in 
forest.” Hearing these words of his brother, who was ui 
the intiuence of extreme rage, SurpanakhS, with tears in 
eyes, said, “Tender, and endowed with beauty, possesse 
youth and gifted with great strength, with expansive < 
resembling white lotuses ; clad in bark and dark dear-sk 
subsisting on fruits and roots, having their senses under 
trol ; leading an ascetic life and a Brahmacharya mod 
existence ; there are two sons of Da^aratha the brothers R 
and Lakshmana resembling the Sovereign of the Gandhar 
and marked with signs betokening royalty. I cannot as 
tain whether they be celestials, or human beings. And 
tween them I saw there a youthful female furnished 
grace, and having a dainty waist; adorned with every kin 
ornament. And it is on account of this female that I 1 
like one unchaste and uncared for, have come by this co 
tion at their hands. Nor I wish in the midst of encou 
to drink the frothy blood of that crooked one as well as tl 
two slain (in battle). Let this my prime wish be crov 
there with fruition. Her and their blood will I drink in dr 
ful conflict.” As she said this, Khara wrought up with bo 
less passion, said, “Two human beings accoutred in a 
and weariug bark and dark deer-skins have in company 
a female entered this deep Dandaka forest. Do ye ret 
after slaying them, as well as that wicked one. And 
sister of mine will drink their blood. Ye R&kshasas, < 
this is my sister’s dear desire. Repairing thither, spe< 
accomplish this, bearing them down by your native m 
Seeing those two brothers slain by you. this one, exceed i 
rejoiced, will drink their blood in the field.” Thus com 
sioned, those fourteen RSkshasas set out there like cl 
driven by the vfinds, accompanied by SurpanakhU. 




Xranya KIND a m. 

8ECTI0N XX. 



55* 



Then the grim Surpanakha, coming to R3ghava's asylum 
pointed out to the R&kshasas those brothers in company 
with SiUL And they saw the mighty R£ma seated in the 
cottage in company with SittL, and ministered unto by 
Lakshmana. And seeing her, as well as the R&kshasas who 
had come, R&ma remarked unto his brother, Lakshmana of 
flaming energy, saying, “O Sumitte’s son, do thou for a 
while guard Site. I shall slay these that have come to 
this asylum here.” Hearing these words of RSma versed 
in the knowledge of self, Lakshmana honored his speech 
by saying, “So be it.” And the righteous R&ghava strung 
his mighty bow decked with gold ; and addressed the 
R&kshasas, saying, “We that have entered into this 
untractable forest of Dandaka in company with Site are the 
sons of Da^aratha, the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana. 
Why do you intend to do injury unto us. Subsisting on 
fruits and roots, having our senses under control, carrying 
on ► asceticism and leading a Brahmacharya life, we are 
passing our days in the forest of Dandaka. It is to destroy 
you, wicked, and troublesome that I equipped with the bow 
have come here at the desire of the saints. Stay there con- 
tent you should not move further. If you have a care for 
your lives, desist, ye rangers of the night.” Hearing those 
words of his, those fourteen grim R&kshasas bearing darts 
in their hands, exceedingly enraged, with their eyes 
reddened, breathing high spirits, harshly said unto the sweet- 
speeched R£ma, having his eyes reddened, whose prowess 
they had not seen before, “Having excited there our 
lord, the high«souled Khara, it is thou that shalt lose thy 
life no later than this day, being slain by us in battle. What 
power hast thou, being one, to stay before us many, in the 
field, — what shall 1 say of thy coping w'ith us in conflict? 




55 * 



x Am A r ana. 



In consequence of the parighas, darts, andi pathifas discb. 
ged by our arms, thou wilt surely lose thy life, along w 
thy prowess, and this bow which thou pressest with I 
hand.” Having said this in wrath, those fourteen R&kshas 
uplifting their weapons and daggers rushed towards Rlno 
and discharged darts at the invincible R&ghava. Thereup 
K&kutstha by means of shafts decked with gold, cut of? tlu 
fourteen darts of theirs. Seeing this, that exceedingly en 
getic one, waxing highly enraged, took out fourteen ndrdch 
whetted on stone, resembling the sun. And even as Satakn 
hurls the thunderbolt, R&ghava drawing his bow and taki 
his aim at the R&kshasas, let go those shafts. And tlx 
Rakshasas, their breasts pierced with vehemence, a 
themselves bathed in blood, fell down to the earth, li 
snakes dropping down from an ant hill. And with tb 
breasts pierced, they, dripping with blood, deformed a 
deprived of their lives, lay on the ground like trees whc 
roots have been severed. Seeing them fallen on the grout 
the Rakshasi, beyond herself in wrath, approaching Khai 
with her blood a little dried up, again in distressful gui 
threw herself on the earth, like a plant exuding gum. A 
in presence of her brother, she set up a mighty roar ; ai 
then her face grown pallid, she dropped tears, emitting crk 
Seeing those RSkshasas slain in battle, Surpanakh& aga 
hastened (to his brother), and the sister of Khara, related 
detail the slaughter of those R&kshasas. 



SECTION XXI. 



Seeing Surpanakha again lying on the ground, Kha 
in anger spake out unto that one, who had come to bring < 
evil, saying, ”1 had but recently commissioned for thy beho 
those heroic R&kshasas living on flesh. Why then dost tb 




IranyakXndam. 



553 



RgaSn * weep ? Bearing regard and attached unto tx»e, 
mod ever engaged in my welfare, they, assailed by others, 
are incapable of being slain ; nor do they not obey my orders. 
V/hat can it be ? I would hear of the occasion owing to 
which again, crying ‘Ah lord,’ thou rollest on the earth like 
! <a serpent Why dost thou beweep like one forlorn, while 
% thy lord, am living ? Arise ! Arise ! Do not fear, cast off 
(l thy stupor.” Thus addressed, and consoled by Khara, that 
’irrepressible one, wiping her eyes, spoke unto Khara, 
^‘Having had my nose and eai^cut off, I had come hither, 
^covered with blood ; and thou badst consoled me. And thou 
Wlso hadst despatched fourteen heroic R^ksbasas, for my 
‘behoof, for slaying the terrific Raghava along with 
^Lakshmana. But all those, bearing ill will (towards R&ma)> 
'bearing darts and pathsas in their hands, have been slain 
Un conflict by means of weapons penetrating into the 
"vitals. Seeing those possessed of great speed, in a moment 
"laid low on the ground, — as well as (witnessing) Rama's 
"mighty deed, great fear hath taken possession of me. O 
(ranger of the night, I am afraid, and agitated, and cast down. 

I have (at length) found in thee a refuge, seeing fear on all 
-*ide&. Wilt thou not rescue me who am sinking Lq this % 
-eoean of grief, having sorrow for its alligators and 
.affright for billows ? And these Rakshasas, living on flesh 
-who bad arrived at that place, have been slain by 
R&roa with sharpened shafts. If tbou hast any kind- 
ness for me as well as those sons off Rakshasas and, 
sQ ranger of night, if thou hast strength and energy to cope 
■with Rama, do thou kill this thorn of the Rakshasas, 

-who hath iset up his dwelling in the .forest of Dandaka. 
dlf thou do not to-day slay that destroyer of foes,* R&ma, 

-I shall banishing shame, give up my life In thy very presence. 

. Meseems, thou backed by thy forces'! art incapable of staying 

• Another reading is that enemy tf mtne.—T. 

tf :S*meU cuts — (Rama) equipped with the bau.—*T. 



70 





554 



: rImTlyana. 



in battle before Rlma in high encounter. Thou plu 
thyself on being a hero ; but art really none such. Pr 
hath been falsely attributed unto thee. Go off from J 
thlna without delay, along with thy friends. O Stainer 
thy line, do thou in battle slay those fool-hardy ones, 
if thou fail in slaying those human beings, R&ma and 
mana, then how canst thou void of strength and of sle 
prowess, stay here ? Overcome by the energy of F 
thou shalt speedily meet with destruction. Da9aratha's 
RUma, is endued with energy. His brother is po 
of high vigour by whom I have come to be deformed.” 
ing thus bewailed long, that R&kshasi, possessed of a spa 
abdomen, through sorrow, became bereft of her senses 
her brother, and excercised with great grief cried, si 
her abdomen with her hands. 



SECTION XXII, 






On being thus taunted by SurpanakhA, Khara 
these sharp words in the midst of the R&kshasas, “A. 
from this thy humiliating censure, my wrath is beyond < 
pare. I can not bear it, like salt-water cast on a 
From my prowess I count not R&ma who is a human 
possessed of a frail life — him who slain by me shall t 
in consequence of his misdeed give up existence. R 
thy tears, and remove thy fear. I shall despatch j 
along with his brother to the abode of Yama. Thou 
O R&kshasi, quaff on the ground the hot blood of R&ma of 
life, slain by my axe.” Overjoyed on hearing the m 
that dropped from Khara’s mouth, she again through ficHr 
ness extolled that foremost of R&kshasas, her brother. Jl 
first reprimanded by her and then praised, Khara spoke mA 
his general, named Dushana, saying, “Do thou, O gealk 



IRANFAKXNDAM. 



555 



one, array fourteen thousand of those R&kshasas, gifted with 
furious vehemence, ever following my wish, who never turn 
■iway from the field ; who are hued like unto purple 
sclouds, who revel in cruelty,* and who are elated (in con- 
ssequence of their prowess). And thou gentle one, do thou 
fet once bring my car as well as my bows, and pasty colored 
Arrows and scimitars, and darts, and various whetted 
•javelins. O thou versed in warfare, for slaying this haughty 
Rama, I go in the very fore-front of the high-souled Paulas- 
gtyas.f As he said this, Dushana brought his great car hued 
like the sun, yoked with excellent steeds of various colors. 
zAnd thereupon in a passion Khara ascended that car 
resembling a peak of Meru, embellished with burnished-gold, 
[furnished with golden wheels, open ; having its pole studded 
with lapises ; surrounded with fishes and flowers and trees 
and stones, and the sun and the moon and gold, and auspi- 
cious articles ; and swarms of birds, and stars ; having 
streamers and swords $ garnished with bells ; and yoked 
with superb coursers. And beholding that mighty army 
consisting of cars and arms and pennons, Khara as well as 
Dushana, said unto that multitude of Rakshasas, u March 
forth 1” And then uttering tremendous roars, rushed out 
w'ith great vehemence four and ten thousands of those ter- 
rible Rakshasas equipped with clubs and pattisas and darts 
and sharpened axes, and scimitars and discuses, — shining 
beautifully in their hands and saktis and dreadful parighas 
and innumerable bows, and maces, and mushalas and vajras 
fearful to behold, griped fast. And those following the will 
of Khara issued out of JanasthSna. Seeing those Rakshasas 
of dreadful forms rushing out, Khara' s car remaining a little 
away (from the press), proceeded after a short space. Then 

♦ The North-West Province’s text has some additional sloka : — Dreadful , 
wearing forms at will , possessing the pride of the lion , having large mouth, 
high-souled, revelling in cruelty, endeued with strength, of fierce energy. — T. 

t Lit. — Pulastya’s sons. The Rakshasas were commonly descended from 
Pulastya. — T. 




55 ® 



RlMll'ANA. 



taking the permission of Khara, the charioteer drove 
speed those powerful steeds decked in shining gold. A ad 

driven with speed, the car of Khara — slayer of foes — filled d 
directions with its rattle. And Khara, fired with wrath, mad 
having piercing voice, hastening to destroy his enemy like 
the Destroyer himself, again urged his charioteer with roar* 
like a mighty cloud showering down stones. 



8ECTION XXIII. 



A s those terrible and inauspicious forces were 
on, a mighty sable cloud with dreadful sounds began tt 
shower down blood. And the steeds yoked to his (Khan's) 
car, gifted with great celerity, dropped down all of a suddes 
on the level high ways strewn with blossoms. A dark circle 
bordered with red, resembling that of charcoal, appeared is 
the vicinity of the sun. And a frightful vulture, havings] 
huge body, approaching the banner, sat upon the upraise! 
golden flagstaff. And beasts and birds having shrill 
living on flesh, remaining near Janasth&na, emitted 
dissonant notes. And in the quarter lighted up by the 
fierce jackals having mighty voices, in dreadful cries pea I 
saged evil unto the R&kshasas. And terrific clouds surcharge! 
with water and blood, and resembling elephants With 
temples, enveloped the sky. And a dense darkness appeai*4 j 
capable of making one's hair stand on end, and no 
was distinctly visible. And out of season, there appears! ] 
evening hued like ,a cloth soaked in blood. And 
Khara, terrible beasts and birds set up cries. Kaakmt 
Gomayas and vultures, portending fear, began to cry. Bver 
inauspicious in war, jackals presaging evil, with their 
mouths belching forth flame, howled in the face of the faceet 
And comets, resembling parighas appeared beside the \ 



IRANYAKJlNDAM . 



557 



That mighty planet Swarbh&nu seized the sun when 
there was no parva . And the winds blew violently ; and the 
sun was without lustre. And when there was no night, stars 
wearing the sheen of fireflies, began to fall. And in the 
tanks fishes and fowls were inert, and the lotuses were 
withered. And at that hour the trees were shorn of fruits 
and flowers ; and without wind there arose dust dusky like 
clouds. And the parrots uttered wild notes — chichikucht. 
And meteors of terrific aspects fell with loud noises. And 
the earth with her mountains, woods, and forests, shook. 
And as the intellegent Khara was roaring from his car, his 
left arm shook, and his voice fell, and as he surveyed around, 
his eyes moistened, and his head ached ; yet through ignor- 
ance, he did not desist. Witnessing these mighty portents 
capable of making one’s hair stand on end, Khara with a laugh, 
addressed the whole body of R&kshasas, saying, “Even as a 
strong person from prowess counts not a weak one, I do not 
dwell upon all these mighty portents, dreadful to behold, that 
have appeared. Even the stars will I bring down from 
heaven with my sharp shafts ; and even Death will I engaged, 
bring to mortality. Without slaying R&ghava puffed up with 
pride as well as Lakshmana, by means of sharp weapons, I 
return not (from the conflict). Let that sister of mine, for 
whom Rftma and Lakshmana have had sense perverted, attain 
her desire, by drinking their blood. I had never before met 
with defeat in conflict Ye have witnessed it. I do not speak 
a falsehood. Wrought up with rage, I shall slay in fight the 
sovereign of the celestials himself, going on his mad Air&vata, 
with the thunderbolt in his hand, — what shall I say of those 
two, who are human beings f Entangled in the noose of 
death, that mighty army of the R&kshasas, hearing his 
challenge, experienced boundless enthusiasm. And anxious 
to see the encounter, there came high-souled saints, and 
celestials, and Gandharbas, and Siddhas, with the Ch&ranas. 
And these pious ones assembled, spoke unto one another. 




558 



RlMAYANA. 



“Welfare unto those cows, and Br&hmanas, and those that 
are prized by the worlds ! As the discus-handed Vishnu 
vanquished the foremost Asuras, may RSghava rout in battle 
those rangers of the night, the progeay of Pulastya ! And 
saying this as well as various other things, the supreme 
saints and the celestials stationed in the sky conceiving 
curiosity (as to the issue of the conflict), beheld the host of 
those R&kshasas, whose days had been numbered. Then 
impetuously Khara issued in his car from the van of the 
army.* And these twelve endowed with exceeding prow- 
ess, via., SynagSmi, Prithu^y&ma, Yayna^atru, Vihangama, 
Duryyaya, Karavir&ksha, Purusha, K&lak&nuka, Maghamlli, 
Mah&m&li, Sarpasya, and RudKir&cana posted themselves 
around Khara. And Mah&kap&la, Slhul&ksha, Hram&thi and 
Tri^irasf — [These four going before the forces, went at the 
back of Dushana]. Then as the planets dart towards the 
sun and moon, that heroic and dreadful army of R&kshasas, 
eager for victory suddenly rushed towards the princes with 
great vehemence. 



8ECTION XXIV. 



W HEN Khara of fierce prowess had come to the asylum 
R&ma in company with his brother saw all those evil prog- 
nostics. And beholding those dreadful portents, R&ma 
exceedingly distressed, apprehending some calamity to the 
R&kshasas, observed unto Lakshmana, “O mighty armed 
one, behold these great presages that have taken place, 
capable of annihilating all beings, and which have for their 
object the utter extermination of the Rdkhasas ! Yonder 

* The N. W. P. text has a different sloka. And seeing him come out on the 
ground , they themselves came out. — T. 

. t The sloka in the text is incomplete : The part within brackets, taken from 
the N. W. P. recension completes it. — T. 





IRA Nr A KIND A M. 



559 



threatening clouds of assinine sable, showering down blood 
and uttering loud sounds are ranging the welkin. And, O 
discerning one, rejoicing at the prospect of my fight, all 
these arrows emit smoke, and my bows plaited on the back 
with gold, are restless. Meseems from the noise of the 
wild birds that impending on us is danger and un- 
certainty to life. Without doubt, there shall take place 
a mighty conflict. At this critical time, my arm shaking 
momentarily, betokens, O hero, victory unto us, and defeat 
unto the enemy. And thy face appeareth pleasant with a 
delightful lustre. O Lakshmana, the pallid face of those 
that prepare for conflict, auger shortening of life. We can 
hear the shouts of the R&kshasas as they roar, as also the 
blasts of the trumpets of those doomed to be wounded 
blown by Rakshasas of remorseless deeds. A considerate 
person that wisheth for his welfare, apprehending peril, 
should prevent disaster ere it arrives. Therefore bearing 
arrows in thy hand, and equipped with thy bow, do thou, 
taking Videha’s daughter, take refuge in the mountain 
cavern, coverd with trees and difficult of access. That thou 
shouldst act contrary to my words, is what I do not wish. 
Swearing by my feet, go thou without delay, my brother. Thou 
art both strong and a hero : Thou canst, without doubt, 

slay these (Rakshasas. But I wish to slay all these rangers 
of the night myself/’ Thus accosted by R&ma, Lakshmana, 
taking arrows and a bow, took refuge in an inaccessible 
cave along with SitS. Thereupon, saying, “Ah ! we have 
spoken it sharp,’’ R&ma put on his mail. And adorned with 
that mail resembling fire R&ma appeared in the dark like a 
mighty flame streaming up. And uplifting his bow, and 
taking his arrows, that powerful one stood there, feeling 
all directions with the twangs of his bow-string. Then the 
high-souled gods and Gandharbas, Siddhas and Ch£ranas 
came there, with the intention of witnessing the fight. And 
high-souled saints of the world, and the foremost Brahmarshis, 




560 



RlMtoANA. 



of pious acts, coming together, spoke unto one another, 
saying, “Hail to cows and Brahmanas, and all those ii 
whom are established the worlds 1 May Rlghava vanquish 
in fight those rangers of the night, the progeny of Pulastya, 
even as the discus-handed Vishnu routed in battle the fore* 
most Asuras !” Having said this, they again spoke, eying 
one another, “There are fourteen thousand of the R&kshasas 
of dreadful deeds, while the righteous R&ma is single. How 
can fight take place (between two such parties) V 9 Having 
said this, the Rhjarshis, Siddhas, multitudes of the bent of 
the twice-born ones, and celestials stationed in the sky were 
moved with curiosity (as to the issue of the conflict). Then 
seeing Rama filled with energy, remaining in the field, al 
beings from fear experienced great pain. And the peerlen 
grace of Rlma of energetic deeds became like unto that of 
the high souled infuriated Rudra * While the gods, Gan* 
dharb&s and Ch&ranas were thus conversing, the forces of 
the Rftkshasas sending up solemn sounds, furnished with 
horrible armour, arms and flags, conversing in heroic par- 
lance, roaring at each other, stretching bows, momentarily 
yawning, t sending forth shouts, and blowing trumpets. The 
universal uproar filled that (entire) forest. Sewed an! 
terrified at the hubbul the rangers of the wood fled to*qmrtm 
free from noise; nor did they cast their eyes backward. 
And that army resembling the ocean, and rife with semd% 
equipped with various weapons, with furious speed ** ** * 
towards R9ma. And R&ma also versed in warfare, casting 
his eyes arround, found the forces of Khara ready for fightf 
Then stretching his dreadful bow, and swiftly taking oat 
shafts, (RlmaJ for compassing the destruction of the entire 
body of the R&kshasas, waxed furiously enraged. And like 

* There is a variation in reading here ; the sense, however, is the same, 

t The commentator says the yawning was in consequence of the 
having during the conflict indulged in liquor.— T. 

t Another text The holder of pinefe.— T, 







XranvakXndam. 



561 

B tinio the flaming fire at the universal dissolution, he, growing 
wroth, was incapable of being looked at. And seeing him 
m filled with energy, the sylvan deities were extremely pained.* 
m And the aspect of the enraged Rima appeared like that of 
I the holder of Pin&ka, intent upon destroying Daksha’s sacri- 
fice. Furnished with bows and ornaments and cars and mail 
u hued like fire, that army of those subsisting on flesh, appear- 
- <ed like masses of blue clouds at sunrise. 

5 SECTION X XV, 

^ . Coming to the asylum, Rhara in company with those 
that went before him, saw that slayer of foes, the enraged 
Rima, holding his bow. And seeing him, Khara possessing 
a shrill voice, raising his bow, commanded unto the chariot- 
eer to drive towards R&ma, — “ Drive on !” At Khara’ s 
command, the charioteer drove the steeds to where the 
mighty-armed Rama stood alone, holding his bow. And seeing 
him (Khara) eutered the field, all those rangers of the 
night — the counsellers — uttering mighty shouts, environed 
him round. And Khara stationed on his car in the midst 
of R2kshasas appeared like red bodied one risen in the 
midst of the stars. Then in battle Khara, afflicting Rama 
of incomparable energy with a thousand shafts, uttered a 
tremendous roar. Then all the rangers of the night, waxing 
exceeding wroth, showered various weapons on that terrible 
bowman, the invincible Rima. And wrought up with rage, 
the R&kshasas in battle assailed him with iron clubs, 
and darts, and prdsas , and swords, and axes. And resembl- 
ing clouds (in hue), the exceedingly strong Rakshasas, 
having huge bodies, darted towards Kakutstha by means 
of steeds and cars. And mounted on elephants resembling 

• Another reading is : — The sylvan deities fled away. — T. 

7 1 



RlMlFANA. 



-mountain-peaks, numbers of R£kshasas, intent upon slayia 
Rama in battle, showered arrows on him, as mighty dost 
•pour down showers on the monarch of mountains. Aa 
R&ma was hemmed in by all those fierce-looking Rtkshamt 
•even as in the evening Mahadeva is surrounded by bii 
courtiers. And as the ocean resisteth the tide of a rival; 
R&ghava by means of arrows resisted the weapons d» 
^charged by the YatudhSnas. As a mighty mountain, ass ailed 
by the thunderbolt, doth not feel pain, Rima, having lui 
person pierced by terrible flaming weapons, did not fed 
jpain. And pierced, and with his person covered with bio 
Rama, the descendant of Raghu, resembled the sun ea> 
veloped in evening clouds. And seeing him single, sur- 
-rounded by many thousands, the Gods, Gandhaiba% 
Siddhas, and supreme saints became sorrowful. Then Rim 
getting enraged, bringing his bow to a circle, discharge! 
sharpened shafts by hundreds and by thousands. And as i 
in sport, Rima in the conflict shot irrisistible (shafts) 
furnished with Kanka feathers, and decked with gold, 
irrisistible, capable of inflicting extreme pain, and resembl* 
dng the noose of Death. And sportively discharged by Rima, 
those arrows deprived the Rakshasas of their lives, like the 
noose forged by death. And piercing the persons of the 
-R&kshasas, those arrows, soaked in blood, going up to the 
sky, appeared with the splendour of flaming fire. And inn* 
merable shafts, exceedingly fierce, capable of depriving the 
Rakshasas of their lives, were let go from the circle of h» 
bow. And with those R&ma severed bows, in battle bf 
hundreds and by thousands and flag ends, and shields, and 
mail, and many arms with embellished hands, resembling the 
trunks of elephants. And the arrows of Rama discharged 
from the string pierced and cut off steeds mailed in gold, 
yoked unto cars, together with the charioteer ; and elephants 
with their riders; and horsemen with horses. And slaying 
loot-soldiers, he despatched them to the abode of Yama. 




XRANYAKlNDABT. 



5%s 

* And cut off with ndlikas and, narachas> and sharp-pointed 1 

• vikirnas , the rangers of the night uttered dreadful howls of 
distress. And like a withered wood afflicted by fire, that 

3 host harassed by the various marrow-piercing* shafts shot by 
3 ? Rima, did not attain ease. And some heroic rangers of the* 
l night possessed of great strength, waxing furious, threwt at 
a Rima prasas , and darts and axes. Thereupon- resisting by 
5 means of shafts those weapons of theirs, the mighty-armed 
q Rima endeued with prowess, took their lives in the conflict,, 
a and cut off the heads (of warriors). And having their heads, 
a and shields and bow-strings, severed, they fell as fall on the 
t earth trees thrown down by blasts from the wings of 
Suparna.J Those rangers of the night that remained there, 
r wounded by arrows, and losing heart, fled with speed to 
; Khara, to seek his protection. Thereat, encouraging them* 

: Dushana, taking his bow, ran furiously in high rage against 
: Rima , like the enraged Destroyer himself. And rallied 
again (by Dushana) and, their fear dispelled through their 
having found refuge with him, they armed with sd/as, talas , 
and crags, darted against Rima. And bearing in their hands 
darts, and clubs, and nooses, those exceedingly strong ones 
showered in battle shafts and weapons. And the Rlkshasas 
discharged vollies of trees and crags. And capable of making" 
one's hair stand on end, that battle was dreadful and furious- 
and now on the side of Rama and now again on that o£ 
the Rakshasas. And waxing exceedingly wroth, they bore: 
on him hard from all sides. Then finding all directions- 
entirely covered with Rakshasas, and showers of shafts, that 
one gifted with mighty strength, sending up a terrific shout* 
fixed (on the bow-string) the exceedingly effulgent Gandharba 
weapon (for discharging it) among the Rakshasas. Then 
thousands of shafts went forth from the circle of his bow ; 

* Another reading is, sharpened. — T. 

f Another reading : remaining before Rama, threw powerful weapons.— T. 

{ Lit.— Ol fair feathers. A name of Garura. 




564 



RlMlYANA . 



and all directions were covered with thronging arrows. 'i 
those Rlkshasas, afflicted with arrows could not see Ri 
how he took out his dread shafts, nor how he dischar 
those excellent shafts ; they only saw him drawing his b 
And the darkness spread by the arrows enveloped the 
with the sun. And Rama stationed there continued pouz 
in shafts. And the earth was covered with shafts shot, ; 
alighting, and alighted simultaneously. And at places w 
seen Rakshasas by thousands slain, falling, enfeebled, t 
and riven. And cut off by RSLraa with arrows, d 
and Patticas in that battle the fearful field was scat 
ed, heads with turbans, arms with finger-fences ; torn thi 
and arms, and various ornaments, horses, excellent elepha 
and cars, shattered in numbers, chouris, fans, and timbrel 
and pennons of various descriptions. Beholding all th 
stain, the (remaining) Rikshasas, sore distressed, could 
(again) advance before that captor of hostile capitals Ran 



SECTION XXVI. 



Jj 1NDING his own forces slaughtered, the mighty-an 
Dushana speedily ordered five thousand Rakshasas, gii 
with tremendous velocity, difficult of being approachet 
who never turned from the field. And from all sides t 
incessantly showered darts and patticas , and scimitars, . 
stones, and trees, and shafts. Thereupon by means 
shafts the righteous Raghava resisted that mighty destruci 
shower of trees and stones. Resisting that shower, Rj 
with his eyes staring, and resembling a bull, flew ini 
great rage, for the purpose of slaying the whole body 
Rakshasas. Then influenced by wrath, and flaming in enei 
he on all sides covered the army along with Dushana * 
arrows. Then the general, Dushana, destroyer of enem 
getting wroth, opposed Rl arrows resembl 





Arani'akAndaiu. 



5*5 



■ihunderbolts. Then heroic Rama highly angered, severed 
seiis ( Dushana’ s) mighty bow with shafts sharp as razors, 
Lstnd slew his four horses by means of as many shafts. And 
tbaving slain the steeds, he (Rama) cut off the head of the 
charioteer by means of a crescent-shaped weapon, and 
spierced the (Rakshasa Dushna) in the breast with a brace of 
Shafts. His bow cut off, his steeds together with the 
zsqharioteer slain, and himself deprived of his car, he (Dushna) 
-ttook a parigha resembling a mountain peak, able to make 
. one's down stand on end plated with gold, capable of 
£ afflicting celestial hosts, studded with sharp iron sankus , 

: and graced with the fat of foes ; — of the touch of a thunder- 
j bolt, able to pierce the persons of enemies.* And takng 
* up in that encounter the parigha resembling a mighty snake, 

: that ranger of the night of cruel deeds Dushna, rushed 
towards Rama. And as Dushana was rushing forward, 
Rllghava by means of a couple of shafts cut off his two arms- 
with the ornaments. And the huge parigha escaping from 
(Dushana’ s grasp) fell forward on the field like the banner 
of Sakra. And like a mighty elephant whose husks have 
fallen off, Dushna, on his arms having been severed, fell 
down to the earth. Seeing Dushana down on the ground, 
and slain in battle, all creatures, saying, “well done !” “well 
done !” paid homage unto Kakutstha. In the meantime, 
three generals, getting wroth, being entrapped in the noose 
of death, rushed against Rama in a body — viz ; Mahakapala, 
Sthulakshya, and the mighty Pramathi the Rakshasa, Maha- 
kapala, upraising a large dart, and Sthulakshya, taking a 
pathica ) and Pramathi, an axe. And as soon as R&ghava beheld 
them advance, he resisted them by means of sharp and keen- 
edged shafts, even as one receives guests that have come. And 
Raghu’s son split Mahakapala’s head, — afflicted Pramathi with 
countless shafts, and lodged (the eyes of Sthulakshya with 
sharp shafts. And they fell down to the earth like mighty trees 



* The text may also mean -able to rend the cities of foes. — T. 





RlMlYANA. 



566 

of many boughs. Thereat instantly inflamed with wrath, R Sm 
by means of flve thousand shafts, sent as many thousands 1 
Dushana’s followers to Yama’s abode. Hearing that Dushaa 
had been slain, Khara, waxing wroth, commanded his mighty 
generals, saying, “Fighting with that vile man, RSLma, along 
with his mighty forces Dushana hath been slain in battle, 
together with his followers. Let all the Rikshasas slay hin 
with weapons of various shapes. ,, Having said this in wrath, 
Khara darted towards Rama. And discharging choice shafts, 
Syenagimi Prithugriva, Jajnasatru, Vihangama, Durjaya, 
Paraviraksha, Parusha, Kalakarmuka, Hepiamili, Mah&mlE, 
Sarpasya, and Rudhira^ana, — these twelve generals endeuel 
with mighty prowess accompanied with their forces, proceeded 
vehemently against Rima, discharging excellent shafts. 
Threat with shafts resembling fire, and decked with diamonds 
and with gold, (Rima) possessed of energy destroyed the rest 
of his'(Khara’s) forces. And as the thunderbolt slayeth the 
mighty, Asuras, those shafts studded with gold, and like onto 
smoking fire, slew those Rakshasas. And in in the field Rim* 
slew an hundred Rikshasa with an hundred Karnis, and * 
thousand (again) with a thousand. And, their armour and 
ornaments severed, and their bows broken in shivers, those 
rangers of the night fell down on the earth, bathed in blood 
And as a spacious dais is covered with Ku£a, the entire field 
was scattered with the Rikshasas fallen in battle with hair 
dishevelled, and covered with blood. And at that time that 
fearful forest, with the Rakshasas slaughtered, and with it* 
clay mired with flesh and blood, resembled hell itself. Four- 
teen thousand Rakshasas of dreadful deeds were slain 
by Rama single, a human being, fighting, (moreover) on foot. 
And the remnant of his (Khara’s) forces were that mighty 
car-warrior, Khara himself, and the R&kshasa, Tri^ira; and 
(on the other side) was that destroyer of foes — Rim a. The- 
rest of the Rakshasas, gifted with great prowess, terrible^ 
and difficult of being withstood, were all slain in battle by 




IranfakAndam. 



567 



*H?he dder brother of Lakshmana. Then seeing that dreadful 
■ army destroyed in terrible conflict by the mighty Rama, 
JKhara ascending a great car, advanced before Rama, like 
Jndra with the upraised thunderbolt. 



SECTION XXVII. 



> ■1 

jSls Khara was advancing before Rama, that leader of the 
-army named Tri^ira, approaching him, said, “Do thou 
^employ me, who am possessed of prowess; and thyself desist 
4rom this rashness. Behold the mighty-armed RJLma brought 

- down in battle. I swear (unto thee) truly j I touch this 
weapon, (to say) that I will slay Rama, who deserves to be 

- slain by all the Rakshasas. Either I shall prove his death 
in battle, or he shall prove mine. Restraining thy martial 

-ardour, do thou for a while become a witness. Either, joyed 
•in consequence of RSma being slain, thou shalt repair unto 
. Janasth&na ; or I being slain, thou shalt enter the field {against 
him).” Thus satisfied by Tri^ara, from his desire to meet 
with death, the latter, on being permitted with “Go,” pro- 
ceeded towards R&ma. And like a hill with three summits, 
Tri9ira rushed towards Rama on an effulgent car yoked with 
steeds. And as a mighty cloud pours down shower, (Tri^ira) 
discharging vollies of shafts, uttered a roar resembling the 
sound of a wet kettledrum. And seeing that the 
JRakshasa Tripura was advancing, Raghava resisted (his 
attack) by discharging sharpened shafts. And that encounter 
• of those exceedingly powerful ones, Rama and Tri^ira was 
fierce, like unto that between a lion and an elephant. Then 
struck on the forehead by a brace of shafts shot by Tri^ira, 
the wrathful Rama enraged, and inflamed with anger, said, 
“Ah ! such is the strength of the heroic Rakshasas J I have 
.been wounded in the forehead with shafts resembling flowers. 




568 



rXmAfana. 



Do thou also take the arrows shot from my bow.” Saying 
this, (Rama) enraged, and influenced by wrath, wounded 
Tri^ira in the breast with fourteen arrows. And that ener- 
getic one by means of four shafts having their joints bent, 
brought down his four steeds. And by means of eight arrows 
(Rama) laid low the charioteer from the front of the car. 
And Rama with a shaft severed his upraised standard. Then 
as that ranger of the night was descending from his broken 
car, R&ma pierced his breast with arrows, — and thereat he 
was stupified. Thereupon, that one of immeasurable prowess, 
out of anger by means of three shafts possessed of celerity, 
brought down Tri^ra's three heads. And that ranger of the 
night present in the field, afflicted by the shafts of Rama, 
after his heads had fallen first, fell, vomitting smoking gore* 
And the Rakshasas remaining after the rest had been slain, 
belonging unto Khara' s original forces losing heart, began 
to flee like deer terrified at a hunter. And seeing them fly, 
Khara waxing wroth, swiftly making them desist, darted 
towards Rama, like Rahu darting towards the Moon. 



SECTION XXVIII. 



Seeing Dushana slain in fight along with Tri^ira, Khara, 
witnessing Rama's prowess, was filled with fear. And see- 
ing that irrisistible Rakshasa host — even Dushana and Tri- 
^ira — slain by the mighty Rama alone, and seeing the great 
courage that was made in the army, that Rakshasa, Khara, 
Was seized with despondency. Then as Namuchi advances 
against Vasava, Khara stretching his powerful bow, advanced 
against Rama. And Khara hurled at Rama tiar&chas revel- 
ing in blood, resembling infuriated venomous snakes. And 
repeatedly twanging his bow, Khara, mounted on his car, 
began to range the field, displaying his weapons through his 




XranyakIndam. 



569 



: acquired skill. And that mighty car-warrior covered all 
m sides with his shafts. And seeing this, R3ma of a tremend- 
m ©us bow with shafts incapable of being borne, and resembling 
sr tongues of flaming fire, entirely enveloped the welkin, even 
r; as a cloud poureth down showers. And with the sharpened 
: shafts shot by Khara and Rama, the entire firmament on all 
sides was thronged. And as each enraged was engaged in 
coping with the other, the sun, enveloped in a net-work of 
r shafts, did not appear. And as a mighty elephant is struck 
r with the goad, R&ma in the conflict attacked (his opponent) 
• with ndlikas and ndrdchas and sharp-pointed vikirna . And 
as that Rakshasa sat on his car, bow in hand, all creatures 
saw him, as if he were the very Destroyer with the noose in 
his hand. And at this time Khara thought that Destroyer of 
all his forces, established in his manliness, the exceedingly 
powerful R&ma to be overcome with fatigue. And seeing 
that one powerful like the lion, and gifted with the vigorous 
gait of the lion, R&ma was not moved, as a lion seeing a 
puny deer (is not moved). And then as an insect falls into 
a flame, Khara mounting a mighty car, resembling the sun, 
approached Rama. And, displaying his lightness of hand, 
Khara severed the bow of the magnanimous R&ma, with the 
arrow (fixed on it) at the place where it is grasped. Then 
taking up seven other shafts, resplendent like the thunder- 
bolt of Sakra, Khara, enraged, sent them into (RSma’s) 
main-joints, and then afflicting Rama of unparalleled energy 
with a thousand shafts, Khara sent up in that conflict 
a loud shout. And riven by the shafts discharged by 
Khara, Raima's mail resembling the sun fell to the ground. 
And pierced with those arrows, all over his body, and 
inflamed with rage, Righava appeared in the field, like a 
smokeless flaming fire. Then that destroyer of foes, RSLma, 
for compassing the end of his enemy, stringed another 
mighty bow, sending forth solemn sounds, — the redoubtable 
Vaishnava bow that had been conferred on him by the 



7 * 




370 



XlXlrAXA. 



Maharshi. And uplifting that superior bow, R&ma ru 
against Khara. Then with shafts having bent knots and gc 
feathers, Rima, wrought up with rage, severed in battle Kh 
standard. And on that exceedingly graceful golden stan 
being hewn down it seemed as if the sun dropped t< 
earth at the behest of the celestials. And thereat K1 
understanding the import of things, fired with wrath, pic 
R&ma’s breast with five arrows, like one striking an elep 
with a goad. And Rama on being pierced with a good c 
shafts discharged from Khara’s bow, and having his 1 
bathed in blood, was highly wroth. Thereupon that forei 
of bowmen, and weilder of a mighty bow, taking six sh 
let them go, after aiming at them. And with one sha 
pierced Khara’ s head, with two his arms ; and with t 
arrows headed like half-moons, Rima wounded Khara ii 
chest. Then that highly energetic one, influenced by ai 
assailed the R&kshasa with thirteen ndrdchas whctte 
stone and with one that exceedingly powerful one, cu 
yoke of the car, with four the four steeds, with 
sixth the head of Khara’s charioteer, with three the < 
trivenu of the car, with two the wheel, and with the tw< 
severing as if in sport Khara* s bow with his ha 
with the thirteenth, resembling the thunder-bolt pic 
Khara in the encounter. Then with his bow shattc 
deprived of his car, (Khara) having his horses slain as 
as his charioteer killed, taking a mace in his hand le« 
to the ground, and stood there. And the celestials 
Maharshis exceedingly rejoiced, assembled in the welk 
a body, and with joined hands extolled that feat of 
mighty car- warrior Rima. 



• Another text reads ; with the arrevo set.—T, 





JRA NY A KJNT>A M. 

SECTION XXIX. 



57 *- 



And to Khara deprived of his car standing with a mace 
n his hand, that exceedingly energetic one, R&ma, preluding 
ns speech with mildness, spake, “Backed by this mighty 
tost abounding in elephants and horses and cars, thou hast 
lone an exceedingly- wicked deed, execrated by all the 
worlds. Even if one happen to be the lord of the three 
rorlds, one given to troubling creatures, and who is cruel 
,nd engaged in wicked acts, can not exist. All persons 
estroy, like a snake that hath intruded itself, him that doth 
ruel deeds, hostile to the interests of every one. People 
elightedly behold the end of him that doing an action either 
rom covetuousness or desire, doth not like a Br&hmain 
wallowing a KarakH, see the consequence thereof. What, 
) R&kshasa, dost thou gain by slaughtering exceedingly 
ious ascetics engaged in righteous acts, living in the forest 
f Dandaka ? Like unto trees whose roots have been reduced, 
ruel persons, execrated of men, who perpetrate iniquitous 
cts, do not exist long. And as a tree puts forth blossoms 
n season, the doer of sinful deeds, at the hour (of repentance) 
nevitably reaps their fruit in the shape of dreadful anguish 
:>f the spirit). And, O ranger of night, as the effect of 
aving taken rice mixed with poison, appears without delay, 
ven so also people readily reap the fruit of their own acts. 
) ranger of the night, it is to take the lives of the perpetra- 
ors of dreadful sins, who wish ill unto men, that I the king 
ave come. Today the gold-decked arrows discharged by 
le, piercing (thy body), shall enter into the earth, cleaving 
t, like serpents falling into an ant-hill. Slain in battle, thou 
halt in company with thy army, follow those people practis- 
ig piety, whom thou hast devoured in the Dandaka forest, 
'oday let those great saints, who had formerly been slain by 
hee. stationed in the sky, behold thee slain (in turn) with my 




57 -? 



RlMlrANA. 



arrows, and inhabiting hell. Do thou strike as thou lik 
And thou that art of an odious race, do thou put forth 
energy. Today I will bring down thy head, even as a p 
falls to the ground.” Thus addressed by Rama, Kl 
enraged and beyond himself with passion, with eyes reddei 
replied, “O son of Da^aratha, why having slain infc 
R&kshasas in battle, dost thou praise thyself without reas 
Those foremost of men that are puissant and powerful 
not, inflated with their energy, mouth (their own coi 
quence). It is the mean-minded Kshatriyas of impure he 
that magnify themselves among men, even as tl 
O Rama, dost. What hero, when the hour of his death 1 
approached, publishes in the field his own lofty lineage 
sings his own hymn. As brass wearing the semblanc 
gold, displays its own defect on being heated,* with a 
lit with Ku^a, + so thou hast betrayed thy own lightness 
this speech of thine. Thou dost not see me staying 1 
mace in hand, like a moveless mountain dyed in me 
bearing mobile and immobile things. I can, mace in h 
deprive thee and the three worlds to boot clean of your li 
like the very Destroyer with the noose in his hand. E 
will not parley much with thee as much as I could wish : 
sun is going to set, and our fight shall be interrupted. F 
teen thousand Rakshasas have been slaughtered by thee 
will for their deaths wipe their tears to-day.” Saying 
Khara, highly enraged, hurled his macef provided 
golden rings at Rama, like unto the blazing thunder! 
Thereat, reducing to ashes trees and shrubs, that mi; 
flaming mace, discharged by Khara’s arm, fell be 
R3ma. And Rama severed in many fragments that mi; 
mace, resembling the noose of Death, as ascending 
welkin, it was coming down. Thereupon, like a she-ser] 

• ie. becomes dusky /as RAmanuya intelligently remarks. — T. 

t Another reading is, lit with husks. 

. \ Another reading is, plaited with gold. 




iRANVAKlNDAM. 



573 



ibrought down by force of incantations, the mace fell to the 
dearth shattered and riven. 



SECTION XXX. 



r (^UTTING off the mace with his shafts, RSghava attached 
s unto righteousness with a smile said unto Khara these nngry 
t words, “Thou vilest of R&kshasas, this is the utmost of thy 
: might, which thou hast displayed. Rendered more nerveless 
at my hands, in vain dost thou storm. Riven by my shafts, 
thy mace, belonging unto thee who art prolix in the matter 
of vocabulary, destroying thy confidence, hath saught the 
earth. And what thou hadst said, — “I will wipe the tears 
of the RSkshasas that have been slain,” hath also proved 
false. As Garura stole ambrosia, will I deprive thee, O 
R&kshasa, who art base, of a mean disposition and a false 
character, of thy life. To day the earth shall drink the blood 
vitiated with foamy bubbles, of thee, having thy throat 
severed, and riven by my shafts. Having all thy body 
covered with dust, and thy two arms lopped off, thou shalt, 
difficult to win, take thy nap, embracing the earth, like a 
damsel difficult to win. On thee, disgrace of Rakshasas, 
lying down, and being fast asleep, this Dandaka shall be 
refuge of those that shall resort to it for shelter. O R&kshasa, 
in thy JanasthSna, with its (Rakshasas) slain by my shafts, 
ascetics shall fearlessly go about in the wood. Today 
Rakshasas, capable of exciting fear in others, rendered forlorn 
and with their friends slain, shall from fear, with their faces 
wet with tears, fly (this place). To day thy wives whose 
husband art thou of such a nature, — and who are of a like 
lineage (with thyself), — shall experience the sentiment of 
sorrow, and be deprived of their all. Thou of a cruel disposi- 
tion, thou of ignoble soul, thou that art aye a thorn (in the 




574 



PAmAi ANA. 



side) of Rrfilunanas, it is for thee that ascetics, frightened an 
dispirited, have so long been pouring the clarified butter.' 
As Rfighava, influenced by anger, said this in the field, 
Khara from wrath, with accents rendered harsher 9 fell ti 
censuring i Rfima', “Thou art wondrous proud : and thoi 
art fearless albeit fear is present unto thee. And cone 
under the sway of death, thou dost not understand what 
should be said and what left unspoken. Those persons tbt 
have been fast bound by the noose of death, do not is 
consequence of their senses having ceased to perform their 
functions, descern what is proper and what improper* 
Saying this unto Rama, that ranger of the night (Khan), 
pursing his brows, espied a mighty sala hard by. Aoi 
looking about him on all sides in the field for a weapon, hr 
uprooted it, biting his nether lip. And raising up the tree 
with his arms, and uttering a roar, that exceedingly powerfal 
one aiming at Rfima discharged it, exclaiming, — “Dead thos 
art.” And as it descended, the puissant Rfima cut it off by 
means of a multitude of shafts, got into a mighty rage for 
the purpose of slaying Khara in battle. Then Rfima pers- 
piring, with eyes reddened in wrath, pierced Khara in batik 
with a thousand shafts. And blood mixed with froth gushed 
by the sides of the shafts, like torrents flowing from founlaia 
in a hill* stupified in battle by the shafts shot by Rim a, and 
maddened by the smell of blood, Khara furiously made fa 
Rfima. And as he (Khara) was rushing on, bathed with bloo4 
Rfima equipped with arms, suddenly summoning his strengtl 
walked backward two or three paces. Then with the Ties 
of bringing about (Khara’s end) Rfima took up in the co* 
diet an arrow resembling fire or another weapon d 
Brahmfi himself. And that righteous one shot at Khan 
that (arrow), which had been conferred on him by th 
intelligent Maghavfin. And discharged by Rfima from U 
bent bow. that mighty arrow with the roaring of the thundci 

• Th e text varies slightly in Other texts.— T. 





&RAN}'AK\XDAM. 



575 



»olt fell at Khara* s breast. And burning in the fire of the 
irrow, Khara fell down on the earth, like the giant Andhaka* 
in the forest of Sweta, consumed by Rudra. And threat Khara 
slain fell down like Vritra slain by the thunder-bolt, or Namu- 
clii by .foam,t or Vala by Indra’s Acatti. After this, the 
celestials, assembled with the Chiranas, struck with wonder 
joyfully sounded kettledrums and showered blossoms on 
Ra ma. “In over half a moment RSLma by means of sharpened 
shafts hath slain in mighty encounter fourteen thousand 
R&kshasas, wearing shapes at will, headed by Khara and 
Dushana. Ah ! mighty is the feat achieved by R<una knowing 
self. Ah ! this mighty prowess, this mighty firmness, show 
4ike unto those of Vishnu himself.” Saying this all the dei- 
ties went to from where they had come. Then the Rajarshis 
4n company with supreme saints, with Agastya (at their head), 
gladly paying homage unto R&ma, said the following words, 
^‘It is for this that the chastiser of Paka, the great Indra, 
Purandra, had paid a visit to the sacred asylum of 
•Sarabhanga. And the Maharshis had dexterously brought 
thee to this place, for compassing the destruction of those 
toes — the wicked Rakshasas, And it is owing to this, that, 
O son of Da£aratha, thou hast performed this mighty deed. 
(Now) the Maharshis will carry on their proper pious offices 
in the Dandaka.” After this, that hero, Lakshmana, accom- 
panied with Sit 3. came out of the mountain cavern, and 
joyfully entered the asylum. Then the victorious and heroic, 
R£ma, honored by the Maharshis, entered the asylum, 
worshipped by Lakshmana. And seeing that destroyer of 
foes, and bringer of comfort unto the Maharshis, her husband, 

* The Asura Andhaka was slain in the forest of Sweta by Rudra. This is 
related in the Puranas. Another reading is Swetarayge yathantaka like the 
Destroyer in the forest of Sweta. Swa, according to the Kurma Pur ana Uttra 
Khan da , in the Kalanyara hill, by a kick with his left leg. slew the 
Destroyer, engaged in pennances, who had come to kill the Rajarshi Sweta, 
who was a great votary of Siva. — T. 

t Namuchi was slain by a thunder-bolt laid over with foam. — T. 





576 



r Am Ay ana. 



Vaidehi embraced him. And seeing the multi 
of Rakshasas slain, Janaka’s daughter, beholdinj 
undeteriorating Rama, ministered unto him with suj 
joy. And with a delightful countenance again embr 
that destroyer of foes, who had been honored b] 
delighted Maharihis, Janaka’s daughter became exceed 
happy. 



SECTION XXXI. 



Then Akampana bestiring himself, speedily issuin 
of Janasthana, spake unto R&vana, “O king, a great i 
R&kshasa living in Janasthana, have been slain, and Khar; 
hath been slain in battle. I alone have with much diffi 
managed to come here.” Thus addressed, the ten-n< 
one, flaming up in energy, with his eyes reddened in * 
said this unto Akampana, “Who, having his days numb 
hath ravaged the dreadful Janasthana ? Who shall no 
wend the way of all beings ? Doing me a bad turn, M; 
van himself, or Vai^ravana, or Yama, or Vishnu, ca 
attain happiness. I am the destroyer of the Destroyer 
self ; and I bum even very Fire. And I can bring I 
itself to mortality. I can by my impetus resist the for 
the wind. And when enraged, I can by my energy con 
the Sun and Fire.” Thereat, Akampana, with joined h 
from fear replied to the ten-necked R&vana, in faltering w 
beseeching courage. Thereat that foremost of R&ksl 
the ten-necked one, granted him courage. Then ins 
with confidence, Akampana without fear spoke, “There 
son of Da9aratha. youthful, resembling a lion*, named R 
of broad shoulders, and possessed of excellent beauty of 
and mighty-arms. (He) is sable-hued, of high fame 



* Another reading is Vi rang * : rupopeta : possessed of handsome fatsm 




iRANrAKlNDAM. 



577 



matchless prowess and vigor. It is he that in Janasthana 
hiiatli slain Khara with Dushana.” Hearing Akampana’s 
swords, that lord of the R&kshasas, Ravana, breathing like a 
smighty serpent, said these words, ‘‘Tell me, O Akampana, 
: iiath Rama come to Janasthana, accompanied with the sover- 
eign of the celestials and the body of the immortals ? Again 
bearing R&vana’s words, Akampana described the strength 
and energy of that high-souled one. (He) is named Rama, 
and is exceedingly energetic ; the foremost of all bowmen — 
furnished with celestial panoply j and is possessed of pre-emi- 
nent prowess in warfare. Like unto him in strength, of red 
eyes, and gifted with a voice like the sound of a kettledrum, 
3 his younger brother, Lakshmana has a countenance resembl- 
3 ing the full-moon. He hath met with him (R 5 ma) as the 
i wind meeteth with a flame. He is endeued with grace, and 
: is the foremost of monarchs. It is he who hath ravaged 
Janasthana. The magnanimous gods did not come there. 
% No doubts need be entertained on this head. The feathered 
. shafts, plated with gold near the plumed part, becoming five- 
mouthed serpents ate up the Rakshasas, Wherever 
oppressed with fear the Rakshasas go, they see Rama 
stationed before them. In this way, O sinless one, hath 
* Janasthana been exterminated by him. ,, Hearing Akampana’s 
words, R&vana said, “I will go to Janasthana for slaying 
Rama with Lakshmana/’ When he had said this, Akampana 
said, “Hear, O king, the true report of Rama’s prowess and 
manliness. Enraged, the highly famous R&ma cannot by put- 
ting forth vigor be checked. And by means of his shafts, he 
can make river in full flood turn its course. And he can bring 
down from the sky its stars and planets, and that graceful 
one can recover the depressed Earth. And that lord can sub- 
merge all creatures by riving the continents of the sea, and 
with his shafts can resist the onset of the ocean, and the 
wind ; and that illustrious one that foremost of persons by 
virtue of his vigor, destroying the worlds, can again create 



73 




578 



XlMlYANA. 



all creatures. O ten-necked one, forsooth, Rlma cannot be 
subdued in conflict, either by thee or the world of Rlkshasas, 
as heaven is incapable of being attained by a sinner. I 
deem him incapable of being slain by all the Gods and 
Asuras together. This alone is the means of slaying. Do 
thou heedfully listen to it ! He has a wife of sterling worth 
in the world, and that slender-waisted one is known by the 
name of Sita. She is in the full bloom of youth, and hath a 
symmetrical person — a jewel among womankind embellish- 
ed with jewels. And neither a goddess, nor a Gandharbi, 
nor yet an Apsari, nor a Pannagi is equal to her ; and what 
is a human female ? Thrashing him, do thou in the mighty 
forest, carry away his wife. Without Sita, Rlma shall cease 
to exist.” Thereupon, the lord of the Rakshasas, Rlvana, 
happened to relish those words ; and reflecting (a while), 
that mighty-armed one addressed Akampana, saying, “Excel- 
lent well. I will go there alone, accompanied by my charioteer 
only. I will this very morning with a glad heart bring 
Vaidehi to this spacious palace.” Saying this, Rlvana de- 
parted, lighting up all sides, on a sun-shiny car, yoked with 
mules. And coursing the firmament, that mighty car of that 
foremost of Rlkshasas looked like the Moon among clouds. 
And proceeding far, he, approaching the asylum (of Tlraka’s 
son), presented himself before him. And Maricha entertain- 
ed the king with meats and drinks passing human. And 
having entertained him personally with a seat and water (to 
wash the feet), Maricha spoke these pregnant words, “O 
king, O lord of the Rakshasas, is it well with the worlds ? 
I am filled with fear : I apprehend that all is not right, since 
thou hast come hither (alone) in such post-haste speed.” 
Thus addressed by Maricha, the highly energetic Ravana, 
versed in speech, said, “My child, the guards (of Janasthana) 
have been slain by Rlma of untiring energy ; and all Janas- 
thana, incapable of being slain, hath (by him) been brought 
down in battle. Do thou, therefore, assist me in carrying 




ARA N V A KANDA m. 



579 



oaway his wife.’ 1 Hearing these words of the lord of R£kshasas, 
&M&richa said, “What enemy of thine in the guise of a friend, 
shath spoken of SitS unto thee ? And, O foremost of mon- 
Marchs, who, having been, entertained by thee, doth not bear 
pthee good will ?* Tell me, who is it that hath told thee, 
VBring Sita hither?’ Who is it that hath set his heart on 
n severing the summit of the entire R&kshasa world ? He 
^ jnust be thy enemy that excites thee to this. Of this there 
. 3 ls not the least doubt. He wishes to extract through thy 
^agency the fangs of a venomous snake. Who (intends) to 
glead thee astray by imposing on thee such a deed ? Who, 
n O king, hath struck in the head, thee that wast slumbering 

1 In peace ? RSghava in war is like a mad elephant, having an 

2 unblemished ancestry for his trunk, perspiration for his 
Jf temporal exudation ; and arms resting well beside him for 
: his tusks. O Rlvana, thou art not competent even to look 
£ at him. Thou ought not to rouse up the sleeping man-lion, 
- that slayer of skillful Rikshasas resembling deer, with his 
c sport in the field, for his joints and down ; arrows for his 
, body and sharp scimitar for his teeth. O Sovereign of the 

R2kshasas, thou ought not to plunge thyself into this dread- 
t ful, and abysslesss ocean, having the bow for its alligators, 
activity of arms for its shine, arrows for its billows, and 
, engagement for its waters. Be propitious, O lord of Lanka ! 

O foremost of R&kshasas, with a contented heart, thou hadst 
, better go thy way to LankS. Do thou ever sport with thy 
. own wives : let R5ma in company with his wife, sport in the 
woods.” Thus addressed by Mlricha, the ten-throated 
f Rlvana desisted, and entered Lanka the best of capitals. 

• Another reading is — ko na nandati ninditi ; who having been insulted 
by thee , doth not rejoice (in thy prosperity ) t and, therefore, in the garb of friend- 
ship, hath done thee this wrong P — T. 





580 RXMlYANA. 

SECTION XXXll. 

> ■ > 

Seeing fourteen thousands of R&kshasas of dread 
deeds, together with Dushana, and Khara, and Tri^ira, si 
in battle by R 5 ma single-handed, that one resembling doo 
SurpanakS, again fell to send up mighty sounds. A 
witnessing R 5 ma’s deeds, incapable of being performed 
others, she, extremely agitated, went to LankS, ruled 
R&vana. And she saw the effulgent RSvana in front of 
palace, surrounded by his counsellors, like V&sava surrotr 
ed by the Maruts ; seated on a supreme golden seat rest 
bling the sun, and like unto a flaming fire on a golden i 
kept alive by sacrificial offerings; unconquerable by hi 
souled saints, celestials, Gandharbas and all creator 
terrible like the Destroyer with his mouth wide open ; 
persons containing scars* of wounds inflicted by the thum 
bolt and the lightnings, in the war between the gods : 
Asuras ; his breast bearing marks of attacks made by A 
vata with the ends of his tusks ; — having twenty hat 
and ten heads, — wearing elegant attire ; broad breast 
heroic ; marked with royal signs ; (in hue) resembling c 
lapises ; embellished in ornaments of burnished gold ; hav 
goodly hands, white teeth, and a huge face resemblin 
hill ; — even him who in the war of the gods had been assai 
an hundred ways with the descent of Vishnu’s discus ; wk 
body had been cut with all the weapons of the celestis 
(him) who furiously disturbs the deep incapable of be 
disturbed ; uproots mountain summits, and tramples 0 
gods, — the destroyer of righteousness, and the violator 
other’s wives ; — the employer of all celestial arms, and t 
disturber of sacrifices ; — who going to the city of Bhagab 



• This reminds one of Milton : of Belzebub, he says, — 

“ ■ — His person 

Deep scars of thunder had intrenched— Par. Book 1 



~~Araj\ vakAnda m. 



5 8r 



.nd vanquishing VSsaki, had carried off Takshaka's beloved 
jrife ; who, going to Kaila^a, and defeating him having for 
mis vehicle a human being, had carried off the car Pushpaka 
( coursing at every where at will ; who endeued with prowess 
rsfoad devastated the divine Chaitraratha grove, the tank 
at (situated there) and the Nandana wood, — as well as the 
& gardens of the gods ; and, who, himself resembling a mountain 
i summit, had by means of his upraised arms, obstructed 
.:the rising of these repressor of foes the exalted Sun and 
a Moon ; who, possessed of calmness, havingr formerly for ten 
s thousand years carried on asceticism in the mighty forest, 
s offered his own heads unto the self create one •> who in 
p | i conflict fears, not death from either gods or Danavas or 
i Gandharbas, or Pi$5chas or birds or serpents, from none save 
3 human beings ; who, possessed of prodigious strength, forcibly 
jr takes away the clarified butter sanctified with mantras from 
j the sacrificial ground ; the destroyer of sacrifices about 
i to be completed ; of villanous nature ; the slaughterer of 
Brlhmanas ; of cruel deeds ; harsh and kindless, and ever 
bent on doing evil unto all creatures ; and railing furiously 
at all creatures ; the inspirer of fear in all beings. And the 
R&kshasi beheld her exceedingly powerful and cruel brother, 
wearing gorgeous apparel and ornaments, and decked in 
a glorious garland, — seated, like the Destroyer at the time 
(of dissolution) ready (to destroy) ; the exalted chief of 
R&kshasas ; the delight of the race of Paulastya. Stupified 
with fear, the R&kshasi, approaching that destroyer of foes ; 
Rlvana, surrounded by his counsellors, said these words. 
And transported with fear and desire, Surpanakhi, given to 
fearlessly ranging every where, who had been deformed by 
that high-souled one, showing (her mutilation), addressed 
these harsh words unto R&vana of flaming and expansive eyes. 




5^2 



Ki.Mi.YANA. 



SECTION XXXIII. 



■ c 3> e » 

Then the woe begone SurpanakhSL, in high wrath, spoke 
harshly in the midst of the courtiers, unto R&vana, given to 
railing loudly against all creatures, “Intoxicated with enjoy- 
ments, acting as thou wilt, and without any control whatever, 
thou dost not see that a dreadful disaster is impending. 
The subjects do not esteem a monarch that is given to sensual 
enjoyments, is intent upon satisfying his lust and is cove- 
tous like the fire in a cemetery. The king that doth not 
act at the proper time, finds destruction along with his king- 
dom and acts. Even as elephants shun the muddy river, 
do people shun from a distance, the ruler that doth not send 
out spies, who showeth not himself (unto his subjects), and 
who hath lost his independence. Like unto rocks in the sea, 
those monarchs that do not administer their dominions, that 
are not dependent, do not prosper. Having incurred the 
hostility of the gods, the D&navas and the Gandharbas of 
subdued souls and senses, how canst thou, who art fickle, 
and hast not employed spies, become the king ? And, O 
RSLkshasa, thou art childish and foolish ; and doth not 
know what thou shouldst. How canst thou then become 
the king ? O thou best of conquerers, those kings whose 
spies, exchequer and morality are not free, are like the 
common herd. It is because kings know distant dangers 
through spies, therefore they are styled far-sighted. I believe 
thou hast no spies, and that thy counsellors are common 
folks, since although Janasthana with thy kinsman is destroy- 
ed, yet thou takest it not to heart. Fourteen thousands of 
RSkshasas of dreadful deeds, with Khara and Dushana, have 
all been slain by R&ma single-handed ; Rama of untiring 
energy hath inspired the saints with courage ; the Dandakas 
have been benefitted ; and Janasth&na hath been harassed. 
But thou, covetous and intoxicated and in the power of 




iRANVAKlNDAM. 



583 



hers, dost not understand that a great danger is over- 
anging (thee). People do not in times of peril assist a 
-vereign that is wrathful, stingy, intoxicated, haughty and 
sceitful. Even his own kindred slay a sovereign that sets 
mmense store by his own self, is of light worth, regards 
snself highly, and irascible. They do not serve him ; nor 
m they fear when he intimidates them. Such an one is speedi- 

dethroned ; and reduced to poverty and becomes like a 
:araw. Even dry wood may serve a purpose ; or stone, or 
ast ; but no purpose is capable of being served by a sovere- 
that hath been cast off his place. Like a cloth that hath 
sen worn, like a garland that hath been trodden, a king 
tat hath been dethroned, although able, is of no conse- 
uence. But a king that keeps his wits about him, under- 
Lands everything, is of controlled senses, and grateful, and 
' virtuous character, endureth for ever. That king is honored 
y men, that sleeping with his eyes, is awake as respects 
is eye of duty, and (the effects of) whose anger and favor, 
re seen (by all). But, thou RSLvana, who hast not by means 
f spies, acquainted thyself with the slaughter of RSkshasas, 
rt of evil understanding and bereft of all these virtues, 
liven to disgracing others, ignorant of the proper distribu- 
ion of time and place,* and never taking care to distinguish 
lerits and defects, thou, thy kingdom being in danger, wilt 
peedily meet with disaster.” On his vices having been thus 
elebrated by her (SurpanakhS), that lord of the rangers of 
tight, Ravana, musing awhile, was long plunged in thought. 

* The commentator, is silent here. The meaning evidently is, thou dost not 
iscern the where andwhen of things. — T. 





$84 



rXmXyaNA. 



SECT 10 N xxxiv. 



SEEING Surpanaka speak harsh words in the midst of the 
courtiers, R&vana, being enraged, asked her, saying, “Who 
is Rama ? And what is his prowess ? And what his form ? 
And what his power ? And why hath he entered the forest 
of Dandaka, difficult to range ? And what R5ma*s weapons, 
by means of which he hath slain the RSkshasas ? And Khara 
hath been slain in battle, and Dushana and Tr^ira. Do 
thou, O thou of a pleasing person, tell me the truth. And 
who hath deformed thee ?” Thus addressed by the lord of 
the Rlkshasas, the R&kshasi, transported with rage, com-* 
menced to duly narrate all about Rama. “Rama the son of 
Da 9 aratha is long-armed, of expansive eyes, clad in bark and 
dark deer-skin, and like Kandarpa in grace. And drawing 
a bow resembling that of Sakra, decked with golden rings, 
he discharges blazing ndrachas t like unto serpents of viru- 
lent poison. I do not see in the field, RSLma drawing his 
bow : I only see the host being slaughtered by a shower of 
shafts. And as Indra destroys (a field of; goodly crops, by 
pouring down hail stones, fourteen thousand R&kshasas of 
dreadful prowess, as well as Khara and Dushana were in a 
little over a moment slain with sharp shafts by R&ma alone 
fighting on foot. And he hath reassured the saints, and 
after having been deformed, I alone from fear of slaying a 
woman, have been let off by the high-souled Rama knowing 
self. His brother is endeued with mighty energy, and in 
merit, is of equal prowess ; and he is devoted to his brother, 
and beareth him regard ; the puissant one is named Laksh- 
mana. And wrathful and invincible and victorious, and 
powerful, and intelligent and mighty, (he) is Raftia’s right- 
arm — his life ranging externally. And R&ma's virtuously 
wedded beloved wife, having expansive eyes, and a face 
resembling the full-moon, is ever to the welfare of her lord. 




IranyakXndam . 



585 



And that fair-haired, fair-nosed, and fair-thighed illustri- 
ous one possessed of beauty, graceth the forest like 
a goddess, — as if a goddess of wealth herself. Of the 
lustre of burnished gold, with her finger nails reddish 
and projecting, and graceful, that surpassingly lovely 
wench is named Sit& — the slender waisted daughter 
of Videha. And neither a goddess, nor a Gandharbi, nor 
a Yakshi, nor a Kinnari, had I seen before on earth, possess- 
ed of such beauty. He that shall have Sita for his 
9pouse, and who shall be warmly embraced by her, shall live 
longer in the world than the Lord of celestials himself. 
That good-natured girl, unparalleled on earth in loveliness, 
who can well pride herself on her person, is a worthy wife 
for thee ; and thou too art a fit husband for her. It is to 
bring over for thee that one of spacious hips, and a high 
and well-developed bust, that I had put forth my endea- 
vours. But, O mighty-armed one I have been disfigured 
by the wicked Lakshmana. As soon as thou hast seen 
Vaidehi having a countenance resembling the full moon, 
thou shalt be afflicted with the shafts of Cupid. If it 
is thy purpose to have her for thy wife, at once stretch forth 
thy right leg, for attaining success. If, O lord of RSk- 
shasas, thou relishest my speech, do thou then, O Ravana, 
without fear, do as I tell thee. Understanding their incapa- 
city, do thou, O lord of Rikshasas, for making her thy wife, 
by force carry away the frail SitSL of a blameless person. 
Hearing that Rama by means of straight coursing shafts hath 
slain the Rakshasas that had gone to Janasthana, and seeing 
Khara and Dushana, killed, do thou ascertaining thy course, 
adopt it. 



74 




RlMlXANA. 
SECTION XXXV. 



sit 



H EARING those words of SurpanakhS, able to make 
one’s hair stand on end, (Rivana) ascertaining his course 
after issuing his orders to his councilors, departed. And 
proposing to himself that act, weighing its good and evil, 
considering his capacity or otherwise, and (finally) determin- 
ing his purpose, R&vana with a fixed mind went to the 
handsome stable. And going to the stable in disguise, the 
lord of the R&kshasasas commanded the charioteer, saying, 
41 Yoke the car." Thus asked, the charioteer possessed of 
fleet vigor, in a trice, yoked an excellent car after his heart. 
And ascending the car coursing at will, made of gold and 
garnished with spectral faces as well as arrow decked with 
gold, — resembling a mass of clouds, the graceful ruler of the 
R&kshasas — younger brother to the Lord of wealth — proceeded 
in that noiseless (vehicle), past the lord of rivers and streams. 
And with chouris of white hair, and a white umbrella, having 
ten-faces, resembling (in hue) cool lapises, wearing orna- 
ments of polished gold, possessed of ten mouths, and twenty 
arms, clad in elegant apparel, — the foe of the celestials, and 
alayer of the foremost ascetics — having huge heads like 
unto the monarch of mountains, the lord of the Rakshasas, 
mounted on' that chariot coursing at will, appeared beautiful 
like a mass of clouds in the sky, with cranes, in the midst 
of lightning. And that one possessed of prowess beheld 
the shore of the sea, containing crags, scattered with trees 
bearing fruits and flowers of various kinds by thousands, 
bordered all around with pools furnished with cool and 
delightful waters, ornamented with spacious asylums having 
daises, graced with woods of plantain, beauteous with cocoa- 
nuts, and blossoming sala and palmyra, and tamala , trees, 
grateful with supreme saints rigidly restraining their fear, 
and with serpents and fowls of fair feathers and Gandharbas 




iRANVAKlNDAM . 



5*r 

and Kinnaras by thousands ; and pleasant with Siddhas 
ami Chiranas, that have controlled their lust ; with th6se 
descendants of Brahm& — the Vaikhanas, the M&shas, the 
1 VSlakhilyas, and the Marichipas ; swarming with females, 
divinely beautiful, dight with gorgeous ornaments and gar- 
lands, and Apsar&s skilled in sport, by thousands ; frequented 
a by the wives of the celestials, and honored by graceful girls ; 
ranged by multitudes of deities and DSnavas, feeding on am* 

* brosia; abounding with swans, Kraunchas, and frogs, echoing 
S® to (the cries of) cranes ; containing stones resembling the 
• 1 lapis, and mild and cool by the influence of the ocean. And as 
■* he proceeded, the younger brother of the Lord of wealth, saw 
■s on all sides spacious cars capable of coursing at will, sable, 
& furnished with fair garlands, and resounding with trumpet 

* notes, — and Gandharbas and Apsaras. And surveying by 
yi thousands woods of sandal exuding gum at their roots,* 

2 and of choice aguru , grateful unto the sense of smell ; and 
i woods and groves of excellent and odorous takkola fruits ; 
i blossoms of the Tam&la, and thickets of black pepper; 

heaps of pearls drying on the shore ; rocks ; the best corals 
i in masses ;t summits of gold and silver ;J charming pellucid 
rills at places ; and cities filled with corn and wealth, 
abounding in gems of women, and thronged with horses, 
elephants and cars — R&vana on the shore of the ocean 
beheld around a level and soft scene, resembling heaven 
itself — where breezes of delicate feel kept breathing. And 
there he saw a fig tree, hued like clouds, surrounded 
by ascetics ; its branches stretched around an hundred 
Yoyanas, and the exceedingly powerful Garura had ascended 
one of its boughs, taking an elephant and a huge tor- 
toise, for the purpose of devouring them. And that best 

* Ni ryydsurasa mutanam, gen, (sandal), which forms the principal in- 
gredient in perf umes, containing odorous gums. — T. 
t Another reading is : heaps of conch. — T. 
t Some texts read sailam — hills. — T. 




5 88 



AlA/AYANA. 



of birds, the powerful Suparna by his weight suddenly brok 
a branch containing full many leaves. And it came to pa 
that VaikhSnasas, Mashas, Vilakhilyas, Marichipas, Aja 
and Dhumras, — saints of the highest order — had assemble! 
there. Thereat, moved by commisseration (for the ascetksi 
the virtuous Garura, taking with promptitude the broket 
bough measuring an hundred Yoyanas as well as the elephatf 
and the tortoise, by one leg, at length eating up the animak 
and by means of the bough, exterminating the country 4 
the Nishadas — that best of birds attained unequalled delight 
in consequence of having rescued the mighty ascetki 
Thereat, attaining double energy by virtue of that deligkt 
that intelligent one set his heart on bringing ambrosia. Aad 
tearing off the iron links of the network, and bursting inti 
the repository of gem, he carried away secreted ambrosi 
from the residence of the great Indra. Kuvcra’s younger 
brother beheld this fig tree, named Subhadra, gracd 
with the Maharshi, on which Suparna had left his mirk 
Then repairing to the other shore of that lord of rivers, the | 
ocean, Ravana saw an asylum lying in the forest in a chain- 
ing and sacred recess. And there he saw a Rikshasa, named 
Mancha, clad in a dark deer-skin, bearing a head of matted 
locks, subsisting on restricted fare. And approaching 
Ravana duly, the Rakshasa, Maricha, received the king with 
every hospitality passing human. And having entertained 
him personally with meats and drinks, M£richa addressed 
him in weighty words, saying, “O lord of the R&kshasas, 0 
king, is it well with thee in Lank* ? And what for hast thou 
again come hither so speedily ?” Thus addressed by M&richa, 
that highly powerful one, skilled in speech, Rftvana said. 




iRANfAKlNDAM. 



589 



SECTI ON xxxvi. 



O Maricha, hearken unto me, my child, as I relate 
everything unto thee). I am distressed j and in this distress of 
nine, thou art certainly my great refuge. Thou knowest Janas- 
liJLna, where lives my brother Khara, and the mighty-armed 
Dushana, and my sister, Surpanakha ; as also that Rakshasa 
subsisting on (human) flesh, the long armed Tri^dra, and 
many other heroic night-rangers besides, of high enthusiasm 
n tattles — R&kshasas, who had been living there at my 
command, troubling in the mighty forest the ascetics carry- 
ng on their pious offices. And fourteen thousands of 
RJLkshasas of dreadful deeds, heroic, high-spirited, — 
RSkshasas possessed of exceeding prowess 5 while residing 
n Janasthana of late, — clad in mail and equipped with 
various weapons, headed by Khara, met with Rama in the 
field. Getting enraged, R&ma in conflict without returning 
any harsh speech, by means of his shafts shot from his bow, 
— hath, a human being, and fighting on foot, with his flaming 
arrows slaughtered fourteen thousand Rakshasas of fierce 
energy. And Khara hath been slain in battle, and Dushana 
also hath been brought down. And having slain Tri9ira 
too, (Rama) hath rid the Dandaka of all fear. Having been 
expelled by his enraged sire, that disgrace of Kshatriyas, the 
weak Rama, living in company with his wife hath effected 
the destruction of this army. He is of a vile character, 
crabbed, foolish, covetuous, of uncontrolled senses, bereft 
of morality, sinful, and ever engaged in the evil of all crea- 
tures, — by whom, violently without hostility my sister hath 
been deformed in the forest by having her nose and ears cut 
off. Of him will I carry off by force from Janasthana, his 
wife, Sita, resembling the daughter of a celestial. Be thou 
my help in it. For certain, O exceedingly strong one, if thou 
help me at my side, if my brothers also back me, I do not 




59 ® 



KlMlYANA. 



think much of all the celestials. Therefore, be thou my help ; 
for, thou art capable, O R&kshasa. In prowess in battle, and 
in indomitableness, there is none like thee. Thou art a 
mighty hero commanding resources, and conversant with 
potentillusory displays. Taking this to my heart, I have 
come to thee, O ranger of the night. Do thou listen as to 
the business in which by my command thou art to help me. 
Becoming a golden deer, marked with silver spots, do thou 
range about in Rama’s asylum in presence of Site. Seeing 
thee helpless, in the shape of a deer, Site will say unto her 
lord and Lakshmana also, — “Do ye catch it.” And when 
they shall have departed,. I shall carry off from the 
empty asylum, Site without let, like RSLhu depriving the 
Moon of his splendour. Then when RSLma shall be sore 
afflicted because of the carrying off of his wife, I shall easily, 
crowning my soul with success, safely bear away Site. 
Hearing Rama’s words, the face of the high-souled M&richa 
became blank and he was seized with apprehension. And 
licking up his dried lips, with winkless eyes, (Maricha) as if 
dead, and exceedingly distressed, eyed R&vana, steadily. 
And alarmed because of Rlvana, with his mind depressed, 
M&richa who well knew R&ma’s prowess in the forest, with 
joined hands in agitation spoke words lending to his own 
as well as R&vana's welfare. 



SECTION XXX VII. 



Hearing the words of that sovereign of the R&kshasas, 
the highly energetic Miricha, skilled in speech, answered 
the Rakshasa chief, saying, “O king, the speaker of soft 
words is common, but the speaker and the listner of unwelcome 
though beneficial words are rarities. Volatile, and employing 
no spies, thou surely dost not understand the exceedingly 




iRANFAKlNDAM . 



59 * 



powerful R&ma towering high in virtues, and resembling 
the illustrious Indra or Varuua himself. I shall be well, my 
child, if RSima fired with rage, do not render all the world 
bereft of Rakshasas ; if Janaka's daughter hath not sprung 
to compass thy destruction, if a dreadful disaster do not 
befall thee because of SitS, and if having obtained for her 
lord thee that art wilful and wicked, the city of Lanka with 
thee and the R&kshasas do not meet with utter extermination. 
The sovereign who is wicked, whimsical and of evil intent 
like thee, bringeth about his own destruction as well as that of 
his kingdom and relatives. R&ma, the enhancer of Kau^alya's 
delight hath not been abandoned by his father, nor is he 
devoid of propriety of conduct ; he is not avaricious, wicked 
nor the destroyer of Kastriya race. He does not lack 
religious merits or accomplishments, nor is he of a harsh 
temperament and intent on causing misery unto creatures. 
Finding his truthful sire imposed on by Kaikeyi he 
has sojourned unto woods. For compassing the wel- 
fare of his father Da£aratha and Kaikeyi he hath entered 
the forest of Dandaka. Rama, O my child is not harsh or 
foolish ; nor has he not control over his senses. Far from 
speaking untruth he does not know false stories even. It doth 
not behove thee therefore to use such improper language 
towards him. He is an incarnation of virtue, pious and 
truthful, and lord of all men as B&sava of all celestials. How 
dost thou then wish to carry away by force his Vaidehi, pro- 
tected by virtue of her own chastity, like unto the rays of 
Sun ? It doth not behove thee to enter that fire of R&ma who 
hath arrows for rays and bow and scimitar for fuel. It doth 
not behove thee, O Ravana, to approach Rama renouncing 
thy kingdom, happiness and love of life, who is like unto 
death itself and Has bow for his widened and flaming mouth, 
and arrows for his rays and who is irrepressible, of mighty 
prowess, holding bows and arrows and repulsing the forces 
of the enemy. Incomparable is his power; daughter of 




59 * 



rXmXyana. 



Janaka is His wife and lives in the forest confiding in ther 
mighty strength of his bow ; thou shalt not be able to carry 
her away. She is the beloved wife of that best of men 
having a leonine chest — and he holds his wife dearer than his 
life and is ever attached unto her. And young SitS. beloved 
of the mighty R$ma, and like unto the rays of flaming fire 
is ever incapable of being carried away by thee. Of what avail 
is this vain attempt O Rakshasa chief ? No sooner R&ma 
shall see you in the battle thou shalt meet with thy end. 
Hard it is to attain life, happiness and kingdom, so it behoveth 
thee to act properly, after consulting with thy ministers 
headed by Bivishana, judging R&ma’s merits and demerits 
and ascertaining his and thy own strength and as well as 
thy welfare. Methinks thy approaching conflict with the son 
of the Ko 9 ala chief forebodes no good unto thee ; hear again 
therefore O prince of the night-rangers, words sensible and 
lending to thy welfare. 



SECTION xxxvnr. 



Once on a time I was engaged in travelling all over the 
earth. I had in my body, resembling a huge mountain, the 
strength of a thousand Nagas. I had parigha in my hands, 
crown on my head and golden ear-rings on my ears and my 
body was of a dark blue colour like that of a cloud. Causing 
fright unto the people I used to wander through the forest 
of Dandaka and live upon the flesh of the Rishis . The 
pious ascetic Viswamitrd being afraid of me went in person 
to the king Da^aratha and said, “When 1 shall remain 
absorbed in meditation on the occasion of parva , let R&ma 
protect me O king, Truly am I afraid of this Mancha.” 
Being thus addressed by.the ascetic the virtuous-souled king 
Dasaratha replied, saying “Rdgbava is still under twelve 




iRANTAKlNDAM. 



593 



hears of age and hath not been well disciplined in tnilitary arts. 
r3ut I have soldiers enough, and if permitted by thee, O thou 
s#est of ascetics, I shall with my four-fold, forces kill thy 
sSnemies, the rangers of the night.” Being thus addressed 
iihat ascetic spoke unto the monarch, saying, “True it is that 
flliou wert the protector of the celestials in the War and 
thy exploits are well known to the world, but no one shall 
fee able to withstand the Rlkshasas but Rlma. The highly 
energetic Rlma, though a boy is sufficiently qualified to 
defeat the enemies ; therefore, O Destroyer of foes, let thy 
soldiery remain here and let me proceed along with Rlma. 
May God bless thee.” Saying this the ascetic Viswamitra 
feeing pleased went to his asylum along with Rlma. After- 
wards having been initiated for the sacrifice in the forest 
sf Dandaka Rlma having unstrung his mighty bow came 
to the ascetic to protect the sacrifice. He had a gold chain 
round his neck, a crest on his head and a bow in his hands ; 
he had a pair of beautiful eyes, and only one piece of cloth ; 
his countenance was of green hue and exquisite beauty and 
even then mustaches or other signs of manhood did not 
appear on his face. Beautifying the entire forest of Dandaka 
with his own splendour Rlma appeared like the newly 
risen moon. Thereupon I resembling a cloud and having 
golden ear locks entered the asylum being proud of my 
power on account of the boons offered unto me by Brahml. 
Seeing me enter he took up his dart and attached string 
unto his bow with proper care. Being under the influence 
of sheer foolishness I passed by him as a child and darted 
towards the sacrificial altar of Viswamitra. Thereupon he 
wounded me with a sharpened sword capable of doing away 
with the enemies and threw me away into the ocean situated 
at a distance of hundred yojanas . He had no mind of 
killing me then and for this he saved my life. I was 
thrown however into the deep ocean being hindered by the 
velocity of his arrows and having lost my conscious- 



75 




594 



RlMlYANA. 



battle with him. 
of the mirthful 
social festivities, 
the destruction 



ness. Regaining my sense after a long while I returned 
the city of Lanka. Myself saved thus, my followers Iw 
were all killed by Rama of unwearied activity though a 
child and a novice in the art of warfare. It is for this 
I do prevent thee ; thou shalt be overwhelmed with cal 
and meet with destruction if dost thou engage thyself i 
In vain shalt thou bring about the 
and sportive R&kshasas ever wil 
And in vain shalt thou for Sitft com) 
of the city of Lanka, adorned with dr 
jewels and filled with golden edifices. Pious men lii 
with a vicious man, meet with destruction for his sins, tl 
they themselves do not commit any misdeed, like unto' 
(devoured by Garura) living in a lake where snakes dwd| 
Thus shalt thou witness that for thy own folly the 
of the night, adorned with celestial ornaments and hatfef! 
their body pasted with sandal, have been killed and bm||| 
down to the earth. And they deprived of shelter 
fled away to different directions, some with their wives ail 
some alone, having their wives carried away (by the enemies* 
Thou shalt further observe that all edifices of LankS. 
enveloped with arrows and flaming fire have been 
down to ashes. There is no greater sin on earth tka 
carrying away another's wife. There are thousand ladies a 
thy seraglio O king. Being attached unto thy wives i 
thou preserve the race of the R&kshasas, thy own line, thf 
wished for life, kingdom, wealth and dignity. Do Ml 
bring about RSLma's mischief if dost thou wish to live happDf 
with thy wives and friends. 1 am thy friend and do ask 
thee again and again to desist (from thy evil intention] 
if dost thou encroach upon SitSL surely shalt thou along 
thy kinsmen go to the abode of Yama being enfeebled by tk 
arrows of Rama." 




XRANrAKXNDAM. 
SECTION xxxix. 



595 



r 

X WAS however somehow saved by Rama in that con- 
flict. Listen what happened afterwards. I was not humbled 
*even by the danger of my life. Once again I entered the 
t forest of Dandaka accompanied by two RSkshasas assuming 
the shape of deer. I had a flaming tongue, huge teeth, 
sharpened horns and lived on the flesh of ascetics. Assum- 
ing such a terrible appearance I began to traverse with 
•great vehemence the Tirtha> Agnihoiri and the place of 
worship ; eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the 
ascetics after killing them I began to hinder all religious ser- 
vices. I had a most ugly figure and was maddened with 
drinking blood, and all the animals of the forest were 
exceedingly frightened at me. White I was thus traversing 
the forest of Dandaka throwing obstacles in the way of 
religious services I saw the pious ascetic RSma living on 
a restricted fare, the honored Sit* and the mighty Lakshmana, 
taking recourse to asceticism, moderate in eating and ever 
engaged in the welfare of created beings. Remembering his 
former enmity and aggrandisement, I, being extremely wrath- 
ful, in my deer shape and with my sharpened horns, darted 
towards him with a view to kill him, considering through 
my ignorance the effulgent R£ma as. none other but an 
ascetic living in the forest. Then stringing his huge bow he 
darted three sharpened arrows at me. Those three terrible 
arrows with bent knots resembling thunder-bolts, killing 
enemies and drinking blood and having the motion of Garura 
and air, coalescing with each other came before us. Wicked 
as I am, I was fully aware of his prowess having been fright- 
end bv him on a former occasion, and so I saved myself by 
escaping, but those two RSkshasas were killed. O Rivana, 
any how saved from the arrows of R&ma and having got 
my life back I have resorted to the life of an ascetic and. 




5Q6 kImXYANA. 

have been carrying on asceticism here being absorbed: 
Yoga . 

From that very day I see Rlma wearing bark and dee 
skin even in the very trees before me like unto Death wc 
the noose in his hands. Terrified as I am I always * 
thousands of Rlma around me. Me seems the entire forest i 
inhabited by Rlma only. O king of Rlkshasas, I see Rla 
even in the quarter where there is no RSma. Seeii 
him in my dreams even I look around like one awake 

0 Rlvana what more shall I speak unto thee, I a 
so much afraid of Rama that such words as Ratna (jewel 
Ratha (chariot) which begin with the letter Ra administi 
consternation unto me. 1 am fully apprised . of the prowes 
of that descendant of Raghu ; it doth not behove thee t 
enter into conflict with him $ he can destroy Vili an 
Namuchi. O Rlvana, whether dost thou fight with Rlmac 
not, do not mention him unto me if dost thou wish to se 
me. Many persons pious and devoted to asceticism on tb 
earth have met with destruction for another’s misdeeds. An 

1 shall meet with a similar fate for thy sins. O thou the rang 
of night do whatever thou likest, I shall not follow the 
Truely is that highly intelligent and effulgent Rlma of might 
prowess, like death itself unto the rangers of night. Thoaf 
the wicked Khara of Janasthlna hath been slain by him i 
Surpanakhl's account, yet how is he to blame for it do the 
truly speak. Thou art my friend ; it is for this and for tl 
w elfare that I speak this truth unto thee. If dost thou n 
follow my words, thyself with all thy kinsmen, shall be sla 
in battle by Rlma. 




e 



iRANVAKlNDAM. 
SECTION XL. 



597 



; As a person desirous of meeting with his end doth not 
alee medicine, RSvana, the king of night-rangers paid 
to heed to the appropriate and sound words of M£richa 
killed in speech, foreboding good unto him. Moreover he 
tddressed him with the following harsh words. “O, Maricha, 
rhat thou hast spoken unto me, shall bear no fruit like unto 
4 &eds sown into a desert-land. I shall not be frightened 
hereby to fight with that foolish R3ma — a human being 
►f vicious deeds. Surely shall I before thee take away from 
hat R&ma the destroyer of Khara,his favourite wife, at whose 
vords he has sojourned into woods renouncing his father 
nother, kingdom and friends. I have made this firm 
esolution in my mind O, M&richa ; even Indra, with the 
jelostials and Ashuras shall not be able to shake it. It would 
lave been proper for thee to give vent to these expressions 
tad I but asked thee for advice to ascertain my duty, the 
>ropriety or impropriety of my action, its way or losses. A wise 
:ounsellor who wishes prosperity unto himself should always 
:ommunicate unto his master his desire with joined hands 
whenever asked to do so. It is always proper to speak before 
nonarchs such pleasant and favourable words as are intended 
For the welfare of the master and are sanctioned by the royal 
etiquette. A respectable king doth not receive with good 
grace friendly words even when they are expressed disres- 
pectfully. Sovereigns of superb prowess assume the semblance 
of five deities — Agni, Indra, Moon, Yama, and Varuna. 
Powerful kings, O Ranger of the night, assume haughtiness, 
power, a placid look and contentment and administer 
punishment unto the wicked. They are to be adored and 
honored therefore on all occasions. Thou art ignorant of 
kingly morality and^ fully absorbed; in illusion. It is for 
this that thou dost out of thy wickedness of heart address 




r RlMlyANA. 



5^8 

me thy truest with these harsh words. ! do not ask the 
O, RSkshasa about the propriety (of my condo: 
or about my welfare. 1 did only ask thee for li 
help. Listen what thou shalt have to do at my reqw 
in my aid ; assuming the shape of a deer having golden s \ 
painted with silvery drops do thou proceed to the asjk 
of R5ma, and ranging at large before Vaidehi do thou afc 
captivating her take thy wished-for way. Vaidehi, bet 
struck with wonder seeing thee a golden deer capable i 
illusions, shall request RSma to get thee soon for he 
KSkuthstha issuing out of the asylum, thou shalt, at 
great distance utter such cries as “O Sit5, O Lak&hmau 
imitating his (Rama’s) voice. Hearing those cries Lakshina: 
also, at the behest of Sit5, shall proceed to R&ma. W he 
both Rama and Lakshmana shall go elsewhere in this wr 
I shall to my felicity carry away Vaidehi like unto 
thousand-eyed deity carrying away Sachi. O R&kshasa,^ 
thou go wherever thou likest after doing this. I shall confi 
on thee, O Maricha, half of my kingdom. O thou of ansi* 
cious look, do thou proceed towards the forest of Dandai 
to compass this end of mine; I shall follow thee ins 
chariot. Acquiring Sita without any conflict, after imposi: 
upon Rama I shall return to LankS successful along with the 
I shall kill thee, O Mlricha, if dost thou not obey my bebe 
I shall compell thee to do this. No body can attain to pro 
perity and happiness, acting against his sovereigns wi 
Truly shalt thou risk thy life if thou approachest Rlma,l 
thou shalt meet with sure destruction if dost thou act agaii 
my will . Consider about it, and do what thou thinkest prop 




iRANTAKlNDAM. 
SECTION XLI. 



599 



Being thus commanded by Rlvana like a king to act 
against his will M&richa fearlessly addressed the lord of the 
R&kshasas with the following bold words, “What person of 
impious deeds hath advised thee O ranger of the night thus 
inorder to exterminate thee with thy kingdom, counsellors 
and children ? Who of a vicious heart, O King, doth not feel 
bimself happy at thy welfare ? Who hath pointed out unto 
thee the way of thy death under the cover of thy means ? O 
Ranger of night surely do thy weak enemies wish to bring 
about thy destruction by making thee enter into a conflict with 
a powerful man. What little-minded man of evil intent hath 
counselled thee thus ? O Ranger of night, really do they 
desire that thou dost bring destruction upon thyself by thy 
own actions. Thou dost not exterminate thy counsellors 
O RSvana, albeit they are worthy of being destroyed. For 
they do not prevent thee entirely from thy evil course. Wise 
counsellors do always restrain a king who wends a vicious 
track being guided by his impulses and passions ; but about 
thee they are quite unmindful, though thou shouldst by every 
means be brought under restraint. O thou the best of 
conquerors, O thou the ranger of night, ministers by the 
grace of their sovereign attain virtue, wealth, desires and 
fame. But those objects are never attained O RSvana when 
they are not in good odour with their sovereign ; moreover the 
subjects meet with dangers when he is devoid of all qualities. 
O thou the best of conquerors, the king is the root of virtue 
and fame unto the subjects ; he should therefore be always 
protected by them. O ranger of night, proud kings of cruel 
temperament, acting against the subjects can never adminis- 
ter their kingdoms. So do the ministers of cruel counsel 
meet with their end like unto a chariot driven into a wild track 
by an unskilled charioteer. Many a pious person, on this 




RlMlYANA . 



^oo 

earth, ever engaged in the performance of religious services, 
have, for the folly of other persons, met with destruction 
along with their relatives. Verily the subjects, O Ravana, 
can never expect to prosper under the regime of hot-natured 
sovereigns acting against their subjects like unto deer under 
the protection of a jackal. All the R&kshasas shall surely 
die, O R&vana whose lord art thou, foolish, cruel and under 
the control of thy passions. I shall not be the least sorry 
if I do meet with a sudden accident— what I do deplore most 
is that thou shalt meet in no time with destruction along 
with thy soldiery. Compassing my end R&ma shall enterminate 
thee in no time — and blessed I shall be being killed by an 
enemy in the conflict. Surely dost thou know that no sooner 
shall I see R&ma I shall be done away with ; thou shalt carrying 
away SiUl meet with thy end along with thy kinsmen. 
And if dost thou bring Sit& with me from the asylum, 
none shall be saved,— -me, thyself, the city of Lank& and the 
R&kshasas. Thou dost not relish my words O ranger of the 
night though prevented by me, who wishes thee welfare ; 
those men who range on the verge of death, well-nigh finishing 
the term of their existence do not receive with good grace 
the counsels of friends. 



SECTION XLI I . 



Speaking these harsh words unto R&vana, M&richa being 
afraid of him said, “We shall both go. Surely shall I be 
deprived of my life by him (R&ma) taking up his scimitar 
and having a bow and arrows in his hands, if 1 go before 
him again. Meeting with his prowess thou shalt never return 
with thy life ; he is like the noose of Death unto thee though 
thou hadst baffled its power. Thou art vicious-souled,what can 
I do for thee ? Be thou crowned with success O ranger of the 




AranfakIndam. 



Got 



#ight, I shall go.” The Lord of Rakshasas being pleased 
yirith Marietta’s words embraced him warmly and said, “This 
(is worthy of thy heroism that thou hast addressed thyself to 
^ct after my desire. Thou wert another Rakshasa before 
iind hast now become true Maricha. Do thou now with me 
^tscend this chariot coursing in the air, crested with jewels 
^and driven by asses having faces of a demon. Enchanting 
Vaidehi thou shalt wend thy way and away shall I carry the 
daughter of the king of MithilS by force (when there shall 
be neither R£ma nor Lakshmana by her.)” Thereupon 
TSrak&’s son assented to Ravana’s words, and both of them 
ascending the chariot like unto, a heavenly car set out for 
the hermitage. And beholding diverse towns, forests, 
mountains, rivers, kingdoms and cities they reached the forest 
of Dandaka and the asylum of Rama. And descending now 
from the golden car the lord of R&kshasas together with 
M Sricha beheld Rama’s asylum. Taking him (Maricha) by 
the hand RavSLna spake saying “There stands the asylum of 
R&ma surrounded by palm trees. Do thou do that for which 
we have come here.” Hearing the words of RSvana, the 
Rakshasa Maricha assuming the wonderful shape of a 
(golden) deer began to range at large before Rama’s hermit- 
age. The points of its horns were like unto (two) excellent 
jewels, its countenance was diversified with white and black 
colour, its face was like a red lotus, its ears were like unto 
two blue lotuses, its neck was little raised, its belly was like 
a saphire, its sides were like unto Madhuka flowers, its 
color was like that of a filament of a lotus, its hoops were like 
unto Baidurjas (a gem of a dark color) ; of lean thighs j 
of firm joints ; its tail having the diversified color of a 
rainbow was upraised. It was of a pleasant and cool hue 
and crested with various jewels. 

And in no time the Rakshasa assumed the shape of a 
beautiful deer. To tempt Vaidehi that ranger of the night, 
assuming a beautiful countenance painted with diverse 
76 




6o 2 



RlMlYANA. 



metals, illumining the beautiful forest and Rlma’s asylum 
with its beauty, and ranging at large on the green field and 
living on grass, began to proceed. That one of lively 
presence having its body painted with hundreds of silver 
drops and living on twigs of trees began to range in the 
forest. Sometimes walking into the plantain house, some- 
times walking around the forest of Karnikd , sometimes 
coming within the compass of Sit&’s vision, that best of 
deer having its back painted with gold began to range 
slowly around the hermitage. It began to walk at pleasure 
near Rama’s asylum. Sometimes going, sometimes stop- 
ping, at one time running very swiftly and receding the next 
moment, that best of deer began to range at large. Some- 
times playing around, sometimes lying on earth and some- 
times following the deer-herd having come within the 
threshhold of the asylum and then followed again by them 
that R£kshasa assuming the form of a deer came back 
to see Sita. He then began to range at large in the 
beautiful forest (extending far and wide). Seeing him other 
forest-deer came (by him) and smelling him fled away into 
different quarters. That Rakshasa, though expert in killing 
deer, did not eat them up, though touching, inorder to hide 
his real self. In the meantime Vaidehi, of auspicious looks 
whose eyes inebriate like wine, being engaged in plucking 
flowers, was going sometimes to the Karnika grove and 
sometimes to the mangoe grove. That best of women, ever 
inured to living in the forest and possessed of a graceful 
countenance, walking and plucking flowers, saw that 
jewelled deer, having its body deversified with pearls and 
diamonds. It had beautiful teeth and lips and had its down 
resembling silver. She began to behold with affection and 
with her eyes expanded with surprise. That illusive deer 
seeing R&ma’s wife began to move around as if lighting up 
that forest (with the fire of its beauty). Beholding that deer 
ornamented with diverse jewels, and the like of which she 




iRANYAKlNDAM. 603 

‘had never seen before, the daughter of Janaka was struck 
With immense wonder. 



SECTION XL 1 1 1 . 



Beholding that deer with its sides painted with gold 
and silver, while collecting flowers, Site, having blameless 
limbs and beautiful hips and having the color of her 
l>ody like that of pure gold became immensely pleased 
and called aloud her husband and Lakshmana with scimitars 
in their hands. “Do thou come soon, do thou come s6on, O 
son of the worshipful Sire, along with thy younger brother” 
—having called (her husband) again and again in this strain 
she continued beholding that deer. Being thus called by 
the daughter of the king of Videha those two best of men 
Rlma and Lakshmana, casting their looks around beheld that 
deer. Seeing him Lakshmana, struck with fear, said “Me- 
thinks, this deer is the RSLkshasa Miricha. This vicious 
M&richa, O R&ma, assuming the shape of a deer oftentimes 
kills at pleasure the kings who come here a-hunting. He 
is cognizant of illusions, by virtue of which he has assumed 
this shape, O best of men ; its countenance is perfectly fine 
like the abode of Gandharbas and resplendent like the Sun ; 
there is no such jewelled deer on earth. O RSghava, O Lord 
of earth, there is no doubt that this is nothing but illusion.” 
When Lakshmana spake thus Site with a pure smile being 
under the influence of enchantment contradicted him, and 
being pleased said €t O son of the worshipful Sire, this deer 
hath attracted my mind, get it for me, pray, O thou of mighty 
arms ; it shall be an object of sport for us. Many a beauti- 
ful deer range at large in the vicinity of our hermitage such 
as Chamara , Srimara , Rtk, Prishata , Banara , and Ktnnara . 
They are all very beautiful and of mighty strength ; but O 




604 



KlMlYANA. 



Prince, I have never seen before the like of this deer. In 
energy, strength and beauty it stands above all deer. Its 
entire body is diversified with various colors, nay, it is a jewel 
itself. It moves before me, beautifying the forest with 
its resplendance, like unto Moon himself. Ah ! what beauty, 
what beautiful a lustre, how musical a voice, this wonder- 
ful deer of variegated countenance, hath indeed cap- 
tivated my heart! If canst thou get by this deer alive, O 
what wonder, what surprise ! When shall we regain our 
kingdom after the expiry of the term of our banishment, this 
deer shall beautify the interior of our palace. O Lord, truly 
shall this celestial deer create surprise in Bharata, 
yourself, me and my mothers-in-law. O best of men, if canst 
thou not get hold of it alive its skin shall also look very 
beautiful (to us). Spreading on Ku£a the skin of this golden 
deer when killed do I wish to invoke the Almighty. It looks 
(no doubt) unseemly and terrible and smacks of wilfulness 
on the part of a wife to command her husband in this way, 
but I am sunk in surprise seeing the countenance of the 
deer.” Rlma’s heart was struck with surprise behold- 
ing that wonderful deer having its down resembling 
gold, horns resembling exquisitely fine diamonds, color 
like that of the newly risen Sun, and resplendance like 
that of the orbit of the planets. Being enchanted by 
its beauty and spurred on by Site’s words, Raghava 
pleased, spake unto his younger brother saying “Behold, O 
Lakshmana, it has immensely excited Vaidehi’s desire. On 
account of its exquisite beauty it shall loose its life to-day. 
It has its equal no where on the earth — neither in the 
celestial garden nor in the Chaittraratha forest. The hairs of 
its body being arranged in regular and contrary courses and 
being painted with golden drops do indeed look very beauti- 
ful. Do thou see, while expanding its mouth, its tongue 
comes out resembling flaming fire like unto a thunder-bolt 
reaving the mass of clouds. Its face is like a glass made of 




AranfakAndam ; 



605 

& best blue saphire, its belly ressmbling a conch and pearl, 
and it is very difficult to ascertain its shapes. Beholding it 
who is there (on earth) whose heart is not enamoured ? Its 
beauty resembles the rays of gold and is variegated with 
diverse hues of jewels. Whose heart is not enveloped with 
surprise beholding such a celestial beauty, O Lakshmana ? 
Princes, with bows in their hands, while-a hunting in 
a deep forest destroy deer either for flesh or for sport. 
Moreover while engaged in sporting they collect many 
a jewel and various metals as gold and silver, in the 
woods. There is not the least doubt that these wild riches 
filling up their coffers are comparatively far better (than 
the wealth acquired by other sources) like unto the objects 
of enjoyment, enjoyed at their fancy by the people inhabiting 
the celestial region. The object which persons desirous of 
acquiring wealth follow without any discretion in their 
actions, is the true definition of wealth given by the political 
economists. Vaidehi of slender waist desireth to sit with me 
on the exquisitely fine golden skin of this gem of a deer, mc- 
seems no deer skin is so comfortable to touch as this— neither 
the skin of Kadali, Priaki , Prabeni nor of Abiki. Truly 
handsome in this deer and the one that rangeth in the 
welkin, indeed these two deer only are celestial — the one that 
rangeth in the sky* (Mrigashira) and this that rangeth on 
earth. And if it be a Rakshasa’s illusion as thou sayest, O 
Lakshmana, then it must be killed by me. This cruel 
vicious-souled M§richa made away with many eminent 
ascetics, while traveling in the forest ; and this RAkshasa 
assuming the shape of an illusive deer destroyed many kings 
— mighty archers while a-hunting in this forest ; it is for this 
that this deer must be killed. Formerly this Batapi t entering 
into the womb of twice-born ones used to come out reaving 

* This refers to Mrigashira , the fifth lunar constellation which resembles 
a deer. — T. 

t The name of an Asur devoured by Agastya. — T. 





6o6 



RlMlYANA. 



them like unto the embryo of a mule. Once on a tii 
this Batapi approached the eminent saint Agastya at 
was devoured by him. After the Sradha ceremony k 
been over, finding that B&tapi desirious of assunri 
the shape of a RSkshasa the great saint Agastya s 
smiling “Being blinded with thy prowess O B&tapi, tk 
hast destroyed many eminent twice-born ones on this eai 
and for this that I do digest thee. Truly that R&ksha 
O, Lakshmana. who wisheth to surpass one like me who k 
controlled his senses and is ever engaged in pious oik 
shall meet with his end like unto this B&t&pi. Thereft 
this Maricha approaching me shall be killed by me like ut 
BStapi being devoured by Agastya. Do thou therefc 
vigilently protect Vaidehi with mail and armours on. It is < 
prime duty, O descendant of Raghu, to protect J&naki. I sh 
either kill this deer or shall get hold of it. Look, 
Lakshmana, Vaidehi is extremely anxious to get the skin 
this deer I shall therefore proceed at once, O son of Sumit 
to catch this deer. The skin of this deer is the best of 
kind ; for certain shall it loose its life today. As long as I 
not kill this deer, O Lakshmana, do thou with Sita rem; 
with vigilance in this asylum. I shall in no time come bs 
with its skin after killing it with one arrow. Do thou $ 
here, O Lakshmana, with jSinaki in constant fear and vi 
lance, along with the mighty Yatayu, intelligent and e 
engaged in pious offices. 



SECTION XLIV. 



Having thus directed his brother, the highly energe 
son of Raghu equipped himself with his gold-hilted scitnit 
And girting himself with his bow bent at three places 9 wh 
served him as an ornament, — as well as a couple of qum 




iRANYAKlNDARi. 



607 



**at one of fierce energy sallied out. Seeing that foremost 
gf monarchs approach, that best of beasts from fear 
disappeared ; and then again showed himself. Thereat 
yirt with the bow and sword, (Rama) rushed where the deer 
jsls ; and beheld him illumining all before him with his 
.•eauty,— -and bow in hand (R£ma beheld) him in that vast 
jorest, darting away after gazing at him, — and sometimes 
seeming to have got beyond arrow range, and at others 
tempting R&ma (by his vicinity). And sometimes influenced 
>y fear and bewildered, (the deer) seemed to course the 
flrelkin; and in the forest now he became visible and 
now vanished from sight. And like the autumual lunar disc 
enveloped by indented clouds, he momentarily showed 
himself, and anon discovered himself at a distance. And 
M&richa wearing the shape of a deer, showing himself and 
disappearing from sight, drew RSghava a long way from 
the hermitage. Thereat Rama, eagerly anxious to secure 
the deer, being foiled by the deer, and in consequence 
growing enraged, wearied out, rested under a shadow, on a 
sward. And that ranger of the night, wearing the form of 
a deer, maddening R&ma, discovered himself (again) at a 
distance surrounded by (other) deer. And Rama desirous 
of taking (the beast), seeing him again, set off at speed. At 
the very moment the deer disappeared from fear $ and again 
showed himself at a distance behind a tree. And seeing him, 
the exceedingly energetic and strong Raghava, determined 
to slay him, growing wroth, taking out a flaming shaft, 
resembling the rays of the sun, powerfully drew his bow, and 
firmly setting the shaft, and aiming it at the deer, let go 
the blazing and burning weapon forged by Brahma, resem- 
bling a flaming serpent. And that best of arrows, like unto 
a thunderbolt, deeply pierced the breast of M£richa, wearing 
the shape of a deer. Thereat bounding up high as a palmyra 
palm, that one whose saws had almost run out, uttered 
terrible sounds, lying on the earth. And while on the point 




[ 6o8 



rAmAyana. 



of death, Maricha renounced his counterfeit shape. And 
remembering the words of Rivana, the Rakshasa reflected, 
“By what means can Sita send away Lakshmana, and RSLvana 
carry off Sita staying in solitude ?” And pierced to the 
marrow by that peerless shaft, Maricha, renouncing his deer 
form, resumed his Rakshasa lineaments ; and giving up his 
life attaining a huge person, considering the time had come 
(for availing himself of the advice tendered by RSvana), 
began to cry with the voice of RSLghava, “Ah Sita ! Ah 
Lakshmana !” And seeing that grim-visaged Rakshasa 
lying low on the ground, with his person bathed in blood, 
and rolling hither and thither, Rlma proceeded towards the 
asylum, thinking of Sita and revolving within himself 
Lakshmana’s words. While returning he thought aside 
“Lakshmana said before that this was Maricha’ s illusion l” 
His words have been verified now. Truly have I killed 
Maricha. Maricha has given up his ghost exclaiming aloud 
Ah ! Sita, Ah ! Lakshmana. I do not know what shall Sita 
do hearing the cry? And what shall the mighty-armed 
Lakshmana do ?” While pondering thus the hairs of the 
virtuous-souled Rama stood on their end. Killing that 
Rakshasa assuming the shape of a deer and hearing his terri- 
ble cry Rlma was overwhelmed with fear arising out of 
sorrow. Thereupon killing a deer and taking its flesh he 
hastened towards Janasth&na. 



SECTION XLV . 



XT EARING that cry in the forest resembling her husband’s 
voice Sita spake unto Lakshmana saying “Do thou go and 
learn what has befallen Raghava. He is crying aloud in 
pitiable accents ; hearing them my life and soul are incapable 
of remaining any longer in their proper places. It behoveth 




iRANFAKlNDAM. 



609 1 



-tbee to save thy brother who is crying aloud in the forest ; 
slo thou immediately repair hence to save him, who is in 
^»eed of thy help. He hath been over-powered by the 
=R&kshasas like unto a bullock brought under the power of a 
Elion,” Remembering the behest of Rama, Lakshmana did 
^not go, though accosted thus by Sita. Extremely mortified, 
2ihe daughter of Janaka spake unto him saying “O Son of 
^Sumitra, thou art an enemy unto Rama, in the garb of a 
^brother. Thou dost not proceed for the relief of thy brother 
:who hath been reduced to such a plight. Dost thou desire, for 
fine, O Lakshmana, Rama’s destruction ? Truely being under 
rthe influence of lust for me thou dost not follow Raghava ! 
: For this thou dost welcome Rama’s disaster ; thou hast no 
^affection for him. For this it is that thou dost sit here 
without anxiety not seeing the highly effulgent (RSma). 
Rama, following whom thou hast repaired unto this forest, 
: being in danger, of what avail is life unto me?” Vaidehi 
speaking thus being influenced by sorrow, and with tears in 
her eyes, like unto a deer, Lakshmana spake unto her say- 
ing “O Vaidehi, celestials, Danavas, Gandharbas, Rakshasas, 
Asuras, or Pannagas, there is none who can defeat thy 
husband. There is not the least doubt in this. Worshipful 
madam ! Celestials, Danavas, Gandharbas, Rakshasas, 
Pi^achas, men, Kinnaras, animals, or birds, there is none 
among them, who can withstand Raghava, who equals the 
lord of celestials in warfare. In fact there is none who can 
do away with Rama in battle. It doth not behove thee 
therefore to accost me thus. Nor do I dare leave thee here 
alone in this forest without Rama. Even the mighty heroes, 
as the Lord of celestials, cannot subdue his prowess with all 
their strength. Even the Almighty Himself, with the 
celestials and the three worlds, cannot defeat htm. Do thou 
therefore renounce grief and console theyself. Sooner shall 
thy husband return killing the best of deer. It is not his 
voice nor one sent by any deity. It is but an illusion of that 



77 




6io 



XlJfAyJWA. 



Rakshasa (Maricha). O Vaidehi, thou hast been left unto my 
charge by the high-souled (Rama) — I therefore do not dare 
leave thee behind, O thou the jewel of a damsel. We have 
made these night-rangers our enemies. For compassing 
the destruction of Khara, O worshipful one, and devastating 
Janasthana, Rakshasas oftentimes use improper words 
unto us in this extensive forest. O Vaidehi, to create mis- 
chief unto the pious is the only amusement of these 
Rakshasas — thou shoudst not therefore be anxious for this.” 
Being thus addressed by him her eyes were reddened with 
ire, and she spake these harsh words unto the truthful 
Lakshmana saying “O cruel one ! O thou the destroyer of thy 
line ! it is a disgrace unto thee that thou wishest to protect 
me (killing Rama). Methinks, this mighty disaster of Rama 
is welcome unto thee, or else why shouldst thou seeing this, 
speak thus, O Lakshmana. It is not a wonder that an evil 
desire lurks in thee who art a hypocrite and a cruel-hearted 
enemy. Verily art thou a monster of wickedness, that 
Rama repairing unto woods, thou hast, being lustful for me, 
followed him alone. Or hast thou been engaged by Bharata 
to act thus ? But thy or Bharata’s intention shall not be 
satisfied, O Saumitre. How shall I desire another man after 
serving the lotus-eyed Rama of dark blue hue as my husband ? 
I shall renounce my life before thee, therefore, O Lakshmana; 
without Rama I shall not maintain my being for a moment 
on this earth.” Hearing these brazen words of SitS, 
capable of making one’s down stand on end, the self-con- 
trolled Lakshmana with joined hands spake unto her saying 
“Thou art a very Goddess unto me, I therefore dare not 
answer thee. What thou hast spoken, O Maithelee, is nothing 
surprising for females. Such is the nature of womankind 
on this earth. Women by nature are crooked, fickle, devoid 
of religious knowledge, and bring about difference between 
father and so.. . O Vaidehi, O daugthcr of Janaka, truly am I 
incapable of putting up with these words of thine. They have 




A RA NFA KANDA M. 



6 i i 



pierced through both of my ears like a heated Ndrdcha. How- 
ever the deities ranging in this woodland are my witnesses — 
may they hear thee. I spoke what was fair and have been 
thus addressed by thee with these harsh words. I do alawys 
obey my superior’s commands. Fie on thee ! Thy des- 
truction is near at hand that dost thou suspect me, being 
influenced by this womanish nature. I shall go where 
Kakuthstha is, may good betide thee, O thou the best of 
damsels ! May the deities of the forest protect thee, O thou 
of expansive eyes ! Many a bad omen appear before me. 
May I see thee again when I shall come back with Rama.” 
Being thus accosted by Lakshmana the daughter of Janaka 
replied weeping and being bathed in tears. “Without Rama, 
O Lakshmana, I shall drink virulent poison, enter fire or dive 
into the Godaveri. I shall destroy this body either by 
hanging or by falling down from the top of a high object. I 
shall never be able to touch another man but Rama.” Speak- 
ing thus unto Lakshmana, Sita, being enveloped with grief, 
weeping, struck her belly* with her hands. Seeing the 
daughter of Janaka of expansive eyes weep thus in pitiable 
accents, Lakshmana losing his attention began to console 
her. Afterwards the pure-hearted Lakshmana, having control 
over his senses, saluting Sita with clasped palms and bend- 
ing low a little proceeded where Rama was, casting again and 
again his glance upon her as he went. 

• Properly it should be “struck her breast.” But it has a special signi- 
ficance here, i. e. — she would not be satisfied until her belly be filled with all 
the R&kshasas slain. — T. 





6 1 2 



JtlMXYANA. 
SECTION XLVI. 



H aving been addressed with those harsh words the 
younger brother of RSghava, enraged, proceeded at once, 
being anxious to see Rama. Thereupon the ten-necked one, 
availing of this opportunity came before Vaidehi assuming 
the semblance of a mendicant. Wearing a soft silken cloth, 
with a lock of hair on his head with an umbrella and shoes 
and having on his left shoulder a rod and Kantandalu , the 
highly powerful one assuming the appearance of a wandering 
devotee carrying thiee long bamboo staves appeared before 
Vaidehi in the forest when there was none of the brothers by 
her. He saw there the young and pious daughter of the king 
like unto an evening void of both sun and moon and as 
the highly terrible Rahu eyes Rohini forsaken by Moon. 
Seeing that terrible one the doer of evil deeds, the trees of 
Janasthana did not move nor the wind did blow. Seeing 
him eye SitSL with his blood-red eyes, the fast streaming 
river Godaveri even slackened its course out of fear. In the 
mean time the Ten-necked R&vana, enquiring about Rama’s 
weak points appeared before Vaidehi in the guise of a 
mendicant. Like unto Sant approaching chitra , that impious 
one, assuming the appearance of a pious man like a well 
covered with grass, approached Vaidehi who was bewailing 
her husband. And seeing that pious spouse of Rama — Vaidehi, 
Ravana stood before her. Her lips and teeth were extre- 
mely fine, her face resembled the full moon and her eyes 
were like lotus-petals. She had a yellow silken cloth on 
and sat in the thatched cottage, overwhelmed with grief and 
bathed in tears. And that ranger of the night with a pleased 
heart approached Vaidehi. Seeing her that Lord of RSkshasas 
was pierced with the shafts of passion. And speaking highly 
of her, surpassing in beauty the three worlds and resembling 
by the excellence of her own person the very goddess 



i 



i 




AranvakAndam. 



613 



of wealth herself Ravana uttering the name of God spake 
unto her saying, “O thou having the color of gold 
and silver, O thou wearing silken cloth, O thou appearing 
like a lotus wearing a garland of lotus-petals, O thou 
of beautiful countenance ! Art thou Bashfulness, Beauty, 
Fame, Wealth, Apsara, Dignity or Rati herself who is 
ranging at will in this forest ? All thy teeth are equal having 
their tops like unto the buds of Kunda flower, beautiful and 
yellow. Thy eyes are expansive, clear, of bloody hue, 
and having black pupils. Thy hip is fleshy and spacious. 
Thy thighs are like those of elephants, round, fleshy and 
perfectly strong. Thy nipples are bulky, pointed, highly 
captivating like cold palm fruits, beautiful and ornamented 
with diverse jewels. O thou of beautiful smile ! O thou of 
beautiful teeth ! O thou of beautiful eyes ! O fine damsel, thou 
dost carry away my heart like unto a river carrying away 
its banks by its stream. The lock of thy hair is exquisitely 
fine, thy breast very close and thy waist is so thin that they 
may be got round even by fingers. There is none so beauti- 
ful like thee— a Goddess, a Gandharbhi, a Yakshi or a 
Kinnari. I had never seen before on this earth a damsel so 
beautiful as thou. This thy beauty the best on earth, thy 
youth, thy grace and thy abode in the forest do agitate my 
mind. So it is well for thee to come (with me) ; it doth not 
behove thee to remain here. This is the abode of terrible 
R&kshasas wearing shapes at will. Picturesque palaces, 
prosperous cities and sweet-smelling gardens are worthy of 
thy abode. O thou of dark-blue eyes, fine is thy garland, 
fine is the smell of thy person and fine is thy apparel — me- 
thinks fine is thy husband too. O thou of pure smile ! 
whom dost thou belong to ? — Rudras, Marutas, or Vasus — 
Meseems, O fine damsel thou art a very gooddes. No one 
comes here— the Gandharbas, the celestials or Kinnarasj 
this is an abode of the RSikshasas ; how dost thou come here ? 
Art thou not afraid of these monkeys, lions, tigers, wolves, 




6 1 4 



RlMlYANA. 



bears, herons and hyenas ? Alone in this forest, art thou not 
afraid of these terrible elephants of fierce motion and 
maddened with the exuding of their temporal juice ? Who art 
thou ? Whose wife ? What for dost thou range alone in this 
forest of Dandaka frequented by terrible RSkshasas ?” Thus 
addressed was Vaidehi by the vicious-souled Ravana. Seeing 
him come under the guise of a twice-born one, Maithelee 
worshipped him with diverse articles necessary for serving a 
guest. Offering him a seat first and afterwards inviting him 
to wash his feet she said unto that one of placid look “cooked 
rice is ready.” Seeing Ravana approach with Kamandalu 
and wearing a red cloth under the guise of a Brahmana, 
Maithelee could not pass by him any way, and considering 
him a twice-born one by various signs invited him as if a 
Brahmana saying, “O Brahmana, do thou sit on this seat facing 
the right ; do thou take this water (to wash thy feet) ; do thou 
enjoy these well-cooked eatables growing in the forest and 
intended for thee.” jSlnaki the wife of Lord of men inviting 
him thus, Ravana, casting a look upon her, addressed himself 
for his own destruction, to carry her away. She w as anxious- 
ly expecting the return of Rama who had gone a-hunting 
with Lakshmana ; she looked around and beheld but on all 
sides the spacious yellow forest-land — there was neither 
Rama nor Lakshmana. 




ARANiAKANDAM. 



615 



SECTION XLVII . 



Being thus addressed by Ravana under the guise of a 
mendicant, desirous of carrying her away Vaidehi thought 
within herself — ‘‘This person is my guest and a Bhahmin ; he 
may curse me if I do not speak to him.” Thinking this 
for a moment Sita said “May good betide thee ! I am the 
daughter of the high-souled Janaka, the king of Mithila, the 
beloved Queen of Rama and my name is Sita. Dwelling in 
the palace of Ikshakus for twelve years, I enjoyed many 
things passing human and had all my desires satisfied. On the 
thirteenth year king (Da^aratha) counselled with his ministers 
about the installation of Rama. Accordingly everything 
necessary for the installation being made ready, Kaikeyi, one 
of my mothers-in-law, begged of her husband a boon. Bring- 
ing my father-in-law under control by means of her virtuous 
deeds, Kaikeyi begged, of that truthful, best of monarchs, 
two boons namely the exile of my husband intoj woods and 
the installation of Bharata, and said “I shall never eat, 
drink or sleep and (if Rama be iastalled) I shall end 
my life.” Kaikeyi speaking thus, that lord of earth, 
my father-in-law begged her to accept diverse riches ; but 
Kaikeyi did not agree. Then the highly effulgent Rama, 
my husband was twenty-five years old, and myself was 
eighteen years old counting from my birth. My husband is 
known all over the world under the name of Rama. He is 
truthful, good-natured, of pure character, ever engaged in 
the welfare of all created beings, of mighty-arms and expan- 
sive eyes. Our father the king Da^aratha was entirely 
under the control of passions, and hence for the satisfaction 
of Kaikeyi did not install Rama. When Rama came to his 
father for being installed Kaikeyi spoke unto my husband the 
following cruel words, “Do thou hear, O Raghava, how I 
have been ordered by thy Sire. This kingdom, rid of thorns 




6i6 



*A MAYAN A. 



is to be conferred on Bharata, and thou shalt have to sojourn 
into woods for years nine and five. Do thou therefore 
repair unto forest, O Kakuthstha and save thy Sire from 
untruth.” Whereto RSLma fearlessly replied ‘So be it !’ Hear- 
ing her words my husband of firm vows acted accordingly. He 
always maketh gifts and taketh none. He always speaketh 
truth and never telleth an untruth. This is his best observ- 
ance, O Brahmana. His half-brother named Lakshmana is 
of mighty prowess. That best of men is R&ma's help 
and the destroyer of foes in battle. That brother of his 
named Lakshmana is of firm resolution and given to 
asceticism. With a bow in hand he hath followed (R&ma) 
flying as an exile unto woods along with me. Thus that 
one (Rama) of firm resolution and ever engaged in pious 
offices wearing matted hair and assuming the semblance of 
an ascetic hath entered this forest of Dandaka along with 
myself and his younger brother. O thou the best of twice- 
born ones, we three being deprived of our kingdom by 
Kaikeyi have been living in this dense forest by virtue of 
our effulgence. Do thou take heart for a moment and live 
here. Instantly shall my husband return with good many 
wild fruits and roots and with sufficient meat after killing 
many a deer, hog and Gosamp. Truly do thou relate unto 
me thy name, Gotra and leneage. O thou twice-born one, 
why dost thou range alone in this forest of Dandaka ?” Siti 
the wife of Rama speaking thus, the mighty Lord of 
RSLkshasas — Ravana replied with these harsh words — “0 
Sita 1 am that Rlvana, the lord of R&kshasas, whom fear the 
celestials, Asuras and human beings. O thou of blamless 
beauty, seeing thee of golden hue and wearing silk cloth 
I do not relish my own wives. I have brought many a 
beautiful damsel from various quarters, do thou become my 
foremost Queen amongst them. That great city in the midst 
of the ocean, Lanka, encircled on all sides by the sea and 
situated on the summit of a hill, is my capital. There shalt 




iRANTAKlNDAM. 



617 



thou with me, 0 Sil3, walk in gardens, and thus thou shall 
no more long for living in the forest. If thou dost 
become my wife, O Sita, five thousand maid-servants deco- 
rated with divers ornaments shall serve thee.” That 
blameless daughter of Janaka, being thus addressed by 
R&vana, was highly enraged, and, passing by him, replied, “I 
am a dependant ol RSma, who is incapable of being shaken, 
like unto a mighty mountain, incapable of being agitated, 
like unto a vast ocean, and resembling Mahendra in efful- 
gence. I am a dependant of that great and truthful Rama 
who is gifted with auspicious marks and like unto a fig 
tree. I am dependant of that lion among men, Rama, 
of mighty arms, of a spacious breast and treading like 
a lion. I am a dependant of that son of a king, Rama, of 
mighty arms, having control over his passions, whose, face 
resembles the full moon and whose fame hath spread far and 
wide over the earth. Why dost thou being a tiger wish for 
a she-lion ? Thou slialt not be able to touch me like unto 
the rays of the sun. O thou wretched Rakshasa, when thou 
hast desired to steal away Raghava's beloved spouse, surely 
dost thou see these trees ( before thee ) as made of gold. 
Dost thou wish to uproot the teeth from the mouth of a lion, 
that enemy of deer, or from that of a serpent? Dost thou 
wish to clasp with thy hands the Mandara hill, or dost thou 
wish to walk in peace after drinking poison ? Dost thou wish 
to rub thy eyes with pins and lick a razor with thy tongue ? 
Thou dost wish to swim across an ocean, having a rock 
tied unto thy neck. Thou dost wish to get at the Sun and 
Moon, to bind a flaming fire with a piece of cloth and walk 
through iron-spikes, as thou hast wished to come by the 
worthy spouse of R£ma. Mighty is the difference between 
R§ma and thee, like unto that between a lion and a jackal, 
a sea and a rivulet, nectar and gruel, gold and iron, sandal 
and mud, au elephant and a cat, a crow and Garura, a peacock 
and a madgie (an acquatic bird), or a duck and a vulture. Even 

78 




6 1 8 



RlMlYANA. 



if thou dost steal me, that mighty archer R&ma, gifted with 
the prowess of the lord of celestials, living, surely shall I die, 
like unto a gnat sucking clarified butter.” Addressing those 
words unto that wicked ranger of the night, that innocent 
(Sita) shook like a plantain tree shaken by the wind. There- 
upon Ravana, like unto^Death in prowess, trembling, began 
to relate unto her with a view to frighten ( her) his race, 
power, name and actions. 



SECTION XLV III. 



j^LFTER Sita had spoken these harsh words, Rivana, 
enraged, with a frown, replied “O thou of a beautiful counte- 
nance, I am the step-brother of the Lord of wealth and my 
name is the mighty Ten-necked Ravana. May good betide 
thee ! Like unto people fearing Death, the celestials, 
Gandharbas, Pi^chas, Pannagas and Serpents fly in 
diverse directions being frightened by me. I have subdued 
by my prowess, my step-brother, the Lord of wealth in a 
conflict, quarrelling with him for some reason. Thereat, that 
one carried by men, renouncing out of my fear this wealthy 
abode of Lanka, hath been living on that Lord of mountains, 
Kaila^a. O thou auspicious one, by virtue of my prowess I 
have taken away that beautiful chariot of his called Puspaka. 
Ascending that chariot thou shalt travel by the etherial 
route. O Maithilee, when I am excited with ire, Indra 
and other celestials at the mere sight of my countenance fly 
away in divers directions out of fear. Wherever I live, 
the Wind bloweth cautiously and the Sun (of piercing rays) 
out of fear for me appeareth in the welkin like the Moon. 
What shall I say more ^Wherever I live, even the leaves of 
the trees do not flutter and the currents of the rivers are 
stopped. Beyond the ocean stands my beautiful capital 




IRANFAKINDAM. 619 

LankSl like unto Indra’s AmarSvati, (the capital of the Lord 
of celestials), guarded on all sides by the terrible night- 
rangers and encircled by yellow walls. That beautiful city 
hath gate-ways of ornamented and jewelled arches and 
golden apartments. It is filled with elephants, horses and 
chariots, always resounds with the sounds of bugles, and is 
beautified with gardens having divers trees of wished for 
fruits. O Sit5, O thou the daughter of a king, in this city 
shalt thou dwell with me. O large-minded damsel, thou 
shalt never think of earthly women. O thou of an exquisite 
countenance, enjoying these many things passing human, thou 
shalt not any more think of Rama — a human being of brief 
existence. Placing his beloved son on the throne, king 
Da^aratha hath sent away his eldest son of weak prowess 
into the woods. O thou of expansive eyes, what shalt thou do 
with that wretched ascetic Rama who hath been deprived of 
his kingdom ? I am the lord of the whole world of Rakshasas ; 
being pierced by the shafts of Kama have I come by thee. 
It doth not behove thee therefore to pass by me. O timid 
damsel, truly shalt thou repent afterwards if thou dost 
disregard me, like unto Uruashee kicking Purarava. Rama 
is a human being and is not even equal to a finger of mine 
in battle. By thy good luck have I come unto thee — 
do thou give thyself up unto me, O thou of a beautiful 
countenance.” Being thus addressed by him, Vaidehi exceed- 
ingly wroth and with blood-red eyes spoke unto that Lord of 
R&kshasas in the lonely forest, these bold words. “How 
dost thou wish to perpetrate such an impious deed after in- 
troducing as thy brother that highly worshipful Kuvera 
adored by all the deities. O Ravana, surely shall all the 
R&kshasas meet with death, who have such a stupid, harsh 
and lustful person like thee for their king. One can breathe 
on this earth carrying away Indra’s wife, Sachi — but stealing 
me, the wife of R&ma, no body shall be able to live in peace. 
O Rlkshasa, it might be possible for one to live on this earth 




620 



ft Am A YANA. 



treating contemptuously the wife of the holder of thunder-bolt, 
hut insulting m C none shall escape the hands of Death even 
if he drinlu th nectar. 



SECTION XLIX. 



H EARING those words of Sit§ the highly powerful Ten- 
necked one striking his hands together, increased his 
body too high. Thereupon, that one skilled in speech again 
spake unto Maithilce, “Methinks thou hast run mad. Hast 
thou not heard of my valour and prowess ? Stationing myself 
in the welkin I can with my hands raise up the earth. I 
can drink up the waters of the ocean. And engaged in conflict 
I can destroy Death itself. With my sharpened shafts 
I can pierce the Sun and cut asunder the earth. Thou 
art mad with thy beauty. Do thou look upon me, who am 
capable of illusions.” When he had spoken thus, his yellow 
eyes became blood-red with rage and assumed the, semblance 
of flaming fire. Thereat R£vana, the younger brother of 
the Lord of wealth, changing his placid countenance, instantly 
assumed his own terrible shape resembling that of Yama. 
Highly exercised with ire, that ranger of the night became 
of ten countenances and twenty arms ; his eyes were 
bloody and he appeared beautiful like unto blue clouds, being 
dressed in gold-hued apparel. Leaving aside the semblance 
of a mendicant, that lord of Rakshasas, R&vana, increasing 
in bulk, assumed his own shape. And wearing a blood-red 
cloth he stood there fixing his look upon that jewel of a 
damsel — Maithili. Thereupon R&vana spake unto Mathiii 
like unto the rays of the sun, having a head of black hair and 
wearing apparel and ornaments, saying, “O thou fine 
damsel, if thou dost wish to have a husband known all over 




AranfakAndax. 



621 



the world, do thou surrender thyself unto me. I am a 
worthy husband for thee. Do thou serve me for ever, thy 
praiseworthy husband. O fine lady, I shall never do what 
thou dost not like. Renouncing thy attachment for a man, 
do thou place thy love in me. O foolish girl, worthy of 
being adored by the learned, for what quality art thou 
attached unto RSLma of a limited life, who hath been deprived 
of his kingdom and hath his desire frustrated, and who of 
an evil intent, hath, at the words of his wife, renouncing his 
kingdom and kinsmen, been living in this forest — the abode 
of voracious animals.” Speaking thus unto Maithili, sweet- 
speeched and worthy of being sweetly addressed, that 
highly wicked Rakshasa, R3vana, being exercised with 
lust, approached towards SitSt and got hold of her, like 
unto Budha holding Rohini in the sky. With his left hand 
he held her, having eyes like unto lotus-petals, by 
the hair, and with his right hand got hold of her thighs. 
Seeing RSvana of sharpened teeth, and mighty arms, 
rssembliog the summit of a mountain and like unto death 
itself, the deties of the forest became highly terrified and fled 
in different directions. Instantly appeared there the 
celestial car of RSLvana, decked in gold, drawn by asses and 
making a terrible sound. Thereupon, that one emmiting 
terrible accents, remonstrated with Vaidehi in harsh words 
and clasping her ascended the car. The virtuous Sita, being 
thus caught by Ravana, began to cry aloud, addressing Rama, 
who had gone away to a distant forest. Ravana, racked 
with lust, rose high up with her like unto the wife of a 
Pannaga, though she tried her best (to get rid of him), for 
she was not in the least attached unto him. Being thus 
carried away by the ethereal track by that Lord of Rakshasas, 
SitSL began to cry aloud, like one mad, distressed and of 
deranged senses. “Ah! mighty Lakshmana, ever ministering 
unto the satisfaction of thy superiors, dost thou not know 
that I have been stolen away by a Rakshasa assuming 




6 22 



RlMlYANA. 



shapes at wil] ? O Raghava, for virtue hast thou renounced 
thy life, happiness and wealth, — dost thou not see that I have 
been carried away by one of mighty iniquity ? O thou the 
subduer of foes, thou dost always control the rebellious, — why 
dost thou not punish such a vicious Rakshasa ? The vicious 
do not instantaneously meet with the fruits of their actions; 
as for corn to ripen requires the assistance of time. For this 
iniquitous deed, which thou hast perpetrated, availing of the 
time and losing thy sense, thou shalt meet with a mighty 
disaster from Rama, bringing about thy end. Ah ! being the 
virtuous wife of the virtuous and far-famed Rama, I have 
been stolen away. Now hath the desire of Kaikcyi and other 
relations been fulfilled. I invoke this Janasth&na and these 
flowery KarnikSs to tell Rama that Ravana hath stolen away 
Sita. I invoke thee, O Godavari, having swans and cranes 
sporting in thy stream, to tell Rama that Ravana hath stolen 
away Sita. I salute and invoke the deities that live in this 
forest of many trees to tell my husband of my being stolen 
away (by Ravana). I do seek the refuge of all deer, birds 
and other animals that live in this forest, and may they all 
communicate unto Rama the news of his dear spouse 
being carried away, and tell him that Sita, losing her control, 
hath been stolen away by Ravana. Even if I am taken away 
by Yama, and if the mighty-armed Rama is apprised of it, 
surely shall he bring me back by the display of his prowess.” 
Racked with sorrow that one of expansive eyes, while thus 
bewailing in piteous accents, she espied Yatayu, the king of 
vultures, seated on a tree. Thereat the daughter of Janaka, 
brought under the control of Ravana and terrified, began to 
cry and utter those piteous words — “O worshipful Yatiyu, do 
thou see that this vicious lord of Rakshasas hath ruthlessly 
carried me away like one having no husband. Thou wilt 
not be able to withstand this mighty, wicked and cruel 
night-ranger wearing emblems of conquest and having a 
scimitar in his han i. Do thou relate unto Rama and to 




2 RJ NY A KJlNDA AI. 623 

Lakshmana everything about my being carried away from the 
beginning to the end. 



SECTION L. 



Hearing these words Yatfiyu, who lay buried in a deep 
slumber, awoke and beheld both R£vana and Janaki. There- 
at the lord of birds resting on the tree, having a big 
sharp beak like unto the summit of a hill, addressed these 
soft words unto RAvana, “O brother Ten-necked one, I am 
conversant with Pur&nas, of truthful vows and abide by reli- 
gion. It doth not behove thee to perpetrate such an iniquit- 
ous deed before me. I am Y&tayu, the mighty lord of vultures. 
Da£aratha’s son R 5 ma is the lord of all men like unto 
Mahendra and Vanina. He is ever engaged in the welfare 
of all men. This exquisitely beautiful and far-famed Sit& 
whom thou art about to steal away, is the married wife of 
that lord of men. And how dost thou thyself being a 
monarch and engaged in the royal office of maintaining 
subjects, carry away by stealth another's wife ? O thou of 
mighty prowess, thou shouldst specially protect the wives of 
kings. Do thou therefore control thy base inclination of 
oppressing another's wife. A hero doth never perform what 
bringeth calumny upon himself. It becometh every individual 
to save another's wife from the touch of a second man like 
unto his own wife. O son of Paulastya, at the instance of 
the king mild subjects perform many an action conducing 
to virtue, wealth and desire, though not mentioned in the ^ 
Sastras The king is the virtue, the king is the desire and 
the king is the prime jewel of all subjects. Virtue, desire 
or sin — every thing ariseth from the king. O thou the best of 
Rlkshasas, thou art vicious and unsteady ; how hast thou 
come by riches like unto a sinner attaining to the abode of 




rImXyana. 



621 

celestials? A vicious person can never ldinquish liis sin- 
ful habits — virtue doth never reside in the abodes of impious 
persons. 

The mighty and the virtuous-souled Rama hath com- 
mitted nothing wrong in thy city or thy dominions. Why 
dost thou then commit wrong by him ? Khara of Janasth&na 
is highly wicked and if Rama of blameless actions hath 
killed him on Surpanakha’s account how is he to blame ? 
Why dost thou then carry away the wife of that lord of men ? 
Do thou soon leave off Vaidehi. Like unto Indra burning 
down Vitrasura, Rama, looking with his terribleieyes like 
flaming fire, shall reduce thee to ashes. Dost thou not 
understand that thou hast tied with cloth a virulent serpent ? 
Dost thou not see that thou hast placed around thy neck the 
noose of death ? It is always proper to carry such a weight 
as doth not exhaust (him who carries) ; it is always proper 
to take such a food as doth not cause illness. Who 
engageth himself in such an action as doth not confer virtue, 
fame or glory, but bringeth about physical affliction only ? 
O Ravana, I am sixty thousand years old and have been 
administering regularly my ancestral kingdom. Old though 1 
am, thou shalt not be able to carry away with safety Janaki in 
my presence, young, accoutered in mails as thou art with 
bow and arrows in thy hands and ascending a car. As it is 
not easy to destroy, by the reasonings of Logic, Vedas and 
Sruties containing eternal and immutable truths, so thou shalt 
not be able to carry away Vaidehi by force before me. If thou 
art a hero do thou fight. Or do thou wait for a moment, 
O Ravana, thou shalt also embrace the earth like unto 
Khara. Soon shall Rama clad in bark destroy thee in the 
battle field, who hadst many a time and oft destroyed in 
conflict the celestials and Danavas. These two princes 
Rama and Lakshmana are at a distance, what shall I do 
now? O vile being, undoubtedly shalt thou, terrified, be 
destroyed by them. Myself drawing my bteath thou shalt 




iRANrAKlNDAM. 



625 



not b e able to carry away this beloved queen of Rama, the 
pure-natured Sit* having eyes resembling lotuses. It is my 
duty to do good unto the high-souled Rim a and Da9aratha 
even at the sacrifice of my life. Do thou stand, O Ten-necked 
one. Behold for a moment. O Rivana, l shall throw thee 
headlong from this car, like unto a fruit from its stalk. O 
ranger of the night, even to my utmost might I will render 
thee hospitality in encounter. 



SECTION LI. 



w HILE YatSyu, the king of birds, spake this, Rivana, 
the lord of Rlkshasas, wearing pendants made of pure gold, 
having his eyes reddened with ire, darted towards him. 
Thereupon they began a terrible conflict in the welkin, like 
Uhto clouds driven by wind. There occured a mighty conflict 
between Yatlyu, the lord of vultures, and RavanI, the lord of 
Rlkshasas, like unto two Malyavin* hills supplied With 
wings. Thereat Rivana began to shower continually 
terrible and sharpened pikes, iron arrows and Vikarnis 
upon the mighty lord of vultures. Yatlyu, the king of birds, 
began to withstand in conflict the arrows and weapons 
darted by Rivana, and Wounded Rivana’ s person With his 
feet supplied with sharpened talorts. Thereupon, to destroy 
his enemy, that mighty hero, the Ten-necked Rivana, being 
exercised with ire, took up ten terrible arrows like unto 
the sceptre of Death, and stretching the bow to the full lie 
shot those straight-coursing sharpened shafts at Yatayii, 
the king of birds. Beholding Janaki with tears In her eyes 
in that RSkshasa’s car, Yatlyu, the king of birds, disregarding 
those arrows, darted towards Ravana, and with his feet 

* A mountainous range described as one of the smaller mountains of India 
proper, lying eastwardtof mount Merit.— T. 

79 




626 



a Am Ay ana. 



broke asunder his bow with the arrows, adorned with pearls 
and diamonds. Thereat Ravnna, almost beside himself with 
wrath, taking up another bow, began to shower arrows by 
hundreds and thousands. Being covered with those arrows, 
the lord of birds appeared like a bird lying in his nest 
Pushing away these arrows by the wind of his wings, he 
again snapped that mighty bow with his feet, and with 
a stroke of his wings shattered Havana's flaming shield like 
unto burning fire. Thereupon, moving away with the wind 
of his wings Ravana’s blazing cuirass resembling flaming 
fire, Jat&yu in that conflict made away with his fleet-coursing 
asses having the faces of demons. Next crumbling 
into pieces with his impetus the mighty chariot of R&vana, 
coursing at will, flaming like fire, having steps studded 
with jewels, and a wooden pole, and throwing dowu the 
umbrella and chowris like unto the full moon along with the 
R&kshasas engaged in carrying them, the effulgent and mighty 
lord of birds shattered the head of the charioteer with 
the strokes of his beak. Having his bow snapped and 
deprived of bis car, horses and charioteer, RSvana fell down 
to the earth, taking Vaidehi on his lap. Beholding 
Ravana fallen on the ground and of broken conveyance, all 
creatures praised the king of vultures again and again and 
worshipped him. 

Thereupon, finding the lord of birds worn out on account 
of his old age, R&vana, highly encouraged, again rose high 
up in the welkin, taking Maithili with him. He had all his 
weapons broken in the conflict, and had but his dagger left 
to him. Beholding him proceed thus pleased, taking the 
daughter of Janaka on his lap, — all his weapons having been 
lost, with his sword alone left, — the mighty and powerful lord 
of vultures, Yat&yu, rose up and, darting towards Rlvana, 
resisted him and said, — “O R&vana of feeble sense, it is for 
the destruction of the whole line of R£kshasas that thou 
carricst away this spouse of R&ma, having arrows 1 ke 




IRAN FA KIND AM. 



627 



unto thunderbolts. Like cne thirsty drinking water, thou 
dost address thyself to drinking poison along with thy friends, 
courtiers, four-fold forces, servants and relatives. Foolish 
persons unaware of the fruit of their actions, meet in a short 
time with their own destruction, — so shalt thou very soon 
meet with thy own end. Thou hast been bound up by the 
noose of Death ; and, proceeding whither, shalt thou save 
thyself, like unto fish eating up baits with hooks for their 
own destruction ? O Ravana, it is beyond thy power to 
defeat the K&kutsthas. They shall not forgive thee for this 
thy encroachment upon their asylum. What hath been per* 
petrated by thee, coward, is blamed by all, and is the way taken 
recourse to by thieves and not by heroes. Do thou fight, O 
Rivana, if thou art a hero, or wait for a moment and thou 
shalt lie down on the earth like unto thv brother Khara. 
Truly hast thou for thy own destruction engaged thyself in 
these impious acts, which are perpetrated by men on the eve 
of their death. What person doth that which leadeth solely 
into sin? Neither the lord of celestials nor the self-create 
Deity doth engage in such an action.” Addressing these 
moral words, the mighty Yatayu swooped on the back of that 
Ten-necked R&kshasa. Like unto the rider of a mad ele- 
phant, the lord of vultures began to tear Ravana with his 
sharpened claws, and that one having for his weapons his 
beak, talons, and wings, began to rive Ravana’s back 
with his beak and claws, and to uproot his hair. Being 
thus aflicted again and again by the king of vultures, the 
R&kshasa shook, with his lips quivering in anger. Beside him- 
self with anger, R&vana, holding Janaki fast by her left flank, 
struck YatSyu with his palms. YatSyu, the subduer of foes, 
bearing the strokes, tore into pieces his ten left arms with 
his beak. His arms cut off, instantly sprang up as many others, 
like unto serpents issuing out of ant-hills, being exercised with 
the pangs of poison. The mighty Ten-necked one, leaving 
aside SitS, out of anger bore down Yatayu with his fists and 




62 8 



RlMlYANA. 



feet. Thereupon arose a mighty conflict between the lord of 
of vultures and the lord of R&kshasas of incomparable 
prowess. Yat&yu addressing himself to displaying his prowess 
for the benefit of Rama, Ravana taking out his dagger, cut 
off his two wings, two legs and two sides. The ranger of 
the night of cruel deeds having sundered his wings, the king 
of vultures approaching wellnigh the verge of death, fell 
down on the earth. Beholding him fallen on the ground 
with his person bathed in blood, SitS. became exceedingly 
aggrieved and darted towards him like unto a friend. The 
lord of Lank& beheld Yat£yu, fallen on the ground, resembling 
sable clouds, having a yellow breast and of exceeding 
prow-ess, — like unto an extinguished forest-fire. Then SiU 
the daughter of Janaka, having a moon-like countenance 
began lamenting, clasping with her hands Yatiyu, crushed 
and fallen on the ground by the vehemence of RSvana’s 
prowess. 



SECTION Lll. 



Beholding the king of vultures slain by Ravana, that 
one possessed of a face fair as the moon, striken with grief, 
broke out into lamentations, saying, “Throbbings of the 
eyes or other parts of the body, dreams, seeing birds or 
hearing their voices, are found to augur happiness or misery 
to men. And, O Rama, although birds and beasts are 
scampering away before thee on my account, thou under- 
standest not the mighty mishap that has befallen thee. O 
Rama, this bird, who, moved by kindness, had come to rescue 
me, owing to my lill) luck, lies slain on the ground. O 
Kakutstha, O Lakshmana, save me 1” Thus did that best of 
females, afflicted with fear, bewail ; and those near (her) 
heard her lamentations. Thereat, that lord of the R&kshasas, 




iRANl'AKlNDAM. 



629 



R&vana, darted towards Vadehi, who, with a faded wreath 
for her ornament, was bewailing in forlorn guise.. Exclaim- 
ing repeatedly, “Leave off !” “Leave off,” the lord of the 
R&kshasas got at her, as she was clasping a mighty tree as 
if it were a creeper. And as she, bereft of the company of 
R&ma in the wilderness, was wailing, saying, “O Rama/' 
“O Rima/’ that one resembling the Destroyer himself* with 
the view of compassing his own end, seized her by her hair. 
On Vaidehi being thus outraged, this entire world consisting 
of mobile and immobile objects, had its nature altered. A 
dense darkness enveloped (everything). And the air did not 
breathe there; and the sun grew dim. Espying with his 
divine vision that Sita was overcome, that Deity, the graceful 
Great-father exclaimed, ‘‘Our work is accomplished.” And 
seeing Sita overpowered, the supreme saints inhabiting 
the Dandaka forest, concluding the destruction of Ravana 
to be as good as accomplished without much ado, became 
at once delighted and aggrieved. As she went on weeping 
with “O Rama,” “O Lakshmana,” Ravana— lord of Rakshasas 
— taking her, coursed through the sky. And then the king’s 
daughter hued like molten gold, clad in a yellow silken 
cloth, looked exceedingly beautiful like unto lightning. And 
on her yellow cloth streaming up, Ravana looked surpassingly 
graceful like a hill aflame with fire. And coppery fragrant 
lotus-leaves belonging to the eminently auspicious Vaidehi 
showered upon R&vana. And her gold-glowing silken cloth, 
flying in the air, appeared like clouds colored by the sunken 
sun. And her blameless countenance on R&vana’s lap in 
the sky did not appear beauteous without R&ma, — like a lotus 
without its stalk ; it appeared like the moon risen tearing 
away dark clouds. And in the aerial regions her counten- 
ance on R&vana’s lap furnished with a fair forehead and 
graceful hair glowing like the interior of a lotus, without 
scars, graced with white, shining, stainless teeth, having 
excellent eyes,— lovely like the moon, having a shapely nose, 




PtllUlYANA. 



630 

a rubeous upper lip, — wearing the splendour of gold in the 
sky, — that captivating countenance of hers in consequence of 
her weeping, and of being stained with tears, as also owing 
to the violence it had undergone at the hands of the lord 
of Rakshasas. — did not appear beautiful without Rama; like 
the moon risen during the day. And furnished with the hue 
of gold, Mithila’s daughter beside the dark-bodied lord of 
the Rakshasas, looked like a golden girtli round a sable 
elephant. And Janaka’s daughter* yellow-hued like lotus, 
having the lustre of gold. — and adorned with shining orna- 
ments, coming in contact with R&vaha, appeared like 
lightning embosomed among clouds. And in consequence 
of Vaidehi’s ornaments sending sounds, the lord of R&kshasas 
resembled an entirely dark rumbling cloud. And as Sill 
was being borne away, showers of blossoms, falling off from 
her head, were scattered all around on the earth beneath. 
And that blossomy shower all around, drawn up by the 
vehemence of the ten-headed R&vana, again alighted beside 
him. And the showers of blossoms scattered around 
Vai^ravana's younger brother, looked like rows of burning 
stars round the foremost of mountains * And the bangles 
studded with gems, loosened from Vaidehi's feet, fell on the 
earth, like the lightning circle.f Of hue like the light red of 
tender twigs, Vaidehi set off the dark-bodied lord of 
Rakshasas, as does a golden cover an elephant. Vai£ravana’s 
younger brother carried away Sita, who, like a mighty 
meteor, filled the heavens with her splendour. And like 
stars of exhausted religious merit dropping down from the 
sky, her fiery ornaments began to fall to the earth with 
sounds. And the chain of the splendour of the moon, removed 
from Vaidehi’s breast, falling down, shone like the Gangi 
dropping from the sky. The trees filled with various fowls, 
with their tops waving because of the wind blowing on high 

* Sumcru. — T. 

t Instead of On the earth — some texts have [bangle*] rxcet-sounding.—T. 




iRANVAKlNDAM. 



631 



and swaying them, seemed to say, “No fear,” [unto Sita.] 
And the pools with their lotuses faded and their fishes 
agitated, seemed to sorrow for the desponding daughter of 
Mithifc as for their friend. And following Sita’s shadow, 
lions, and tigers, and other beasts and birds, rushed from all 
sides in wrath. And the mountains, with their faces washed 
with water-falls representing tears, and their summits resem- 
bling uplifted arms, seemed to lament for Sita, as she was 
being carried away. And beholding Vaidehi carried away, 
the glorious Sun, oppressed with sadness, had his rays 
dimmed and his disc darkened. “Virtue is not ; and where 
is truth ? And there is neither sincerity nor kindness, — in a 
case in which R&vana is carrying away Raima's Vaidehi 
thus did all creatures lament in numbers. And the young of 
deer, afflicted with fear, wept with woe-begone faces. And 
the sylvan deities, looking up now and again with eyes 
betokening fear, had their persons all in a tremble. For 
compassing his own destruction, the Ten-headed one carried 
away the intelligent Vaidehi, bewailing bitterly, Sita, who 
had come by such misfortune, sweet-voiced, crying, “O 
Lakshmana” “O Rama,” and casting glances on the ground 
many a time and oft, — the ends of her hair waving and her 
tilika wiped out. Then oppressed with the load of fear, Sita 
of luminous smiles, — Mithila’s daughter, bereft of her friends 
—not beholding either Rama or Lakshmana, became pale of 
countenance. 



SECTION Lilt. 



Seeing him fly up into the air, Janaka’s daughter, 
Maithili, became aggrieved and exceedingly agitated, and 
great was the fear that possessed her. Her eyes expressing 
rage, weeping and fright, Sit5, as she was being carried away, 







RlMlYANA. 



weeping piteously, spoke to the grim-eyed lord of the 
R&kshasas, saying, ‘‘Dost thou not, O base wretch, 0 
Ravana, feel shame on account of this act— >thou, who, 
knowing that I was alone, fliest away, carrying me ? Coward 
that thou art, thou it was, whd, desirous of carrying me off, 
by the shape of a deer, hadst, bythy [powers of] illusion 
taken away my lord. And he also that endeavoured to 
rescue me, has been slain by thee— the ancient king of 
vultures, who was the friend of my father-indaw. Great, 
forsooth, is found to be thy might, thou vilest of Rfckshasas ; 
in that thou hast carried me offtby simply declaring thy name, 
but hast not won me in war. Why dost thou not, O execrable 
one, take shame unto thyself, having perpetrated such a 
heinous act — having carried off another’s wife in the absence 
of her husband ? This fell and foul act of thine fraught with 
unrighteousness, heroic persons shall bruit about the world. 
Fie on thy heroism and thy truth,— of which thou didst apeak 
at that time ; and fie also on this character of thine, calculat- 
ed to sully thy line in this world. What can I do (unto 
thee), as thou proceedest with speed ? But stay thou for a 
moment ; and thou shalt not rc.turn with life. Shouldst 
thou come within the range of the vision of those sons of 
the king, thou couldst not, although thou shouldst happen 
to be accompanied with thy army, live for a moment. Even 
as a bird cannot bear the touch of a flaming fire in a forest, 
thou canst never bear the touch of their arrows. Effecting 
thy own welfare, do thou, O R&vana, leave me. If thou do 
not let me go, my husband along with his brother would 
strive for thy destruction. As intent upon sensul enjoyment, 
thou endeavourest to ravish me, this very endeavour of 
thine, O mean wight, shall come to naught. Not beholding 
my lord resembling a celestial, I cannot, come under the 
sway of my enemy, bear to live long. As one dwelling on 
earth perceives objects in their reversed relations at the 
time of one’s death, so thou dost not perceive what is for thy 




IranfakXndam. 



633 



good or profit. Those moribund do not relish what would 
do them good. I see thee with the noose of Death wound 
round thy neck. As, O ranger of night, thou art not affect- 
ed with fear, albeit the situation is one calculated to raise 
one’s apprehensions, it is clear that thou wilt see the golden 
trees, the dreadful river Vaitarani flowing with blood, the 
terrible wood, O Ravana, rife with leaves in the shape of 
swords, and a sharp Salmali containing blossoms of shining 
gold, having lapises for its leaves, and bearing iron thorns. 
But, O shameless one, like a person that hath drunk poison, 
having done this wrong unto that high-souled one, thou 
wilt uot be able to save thyself. O Ravana, thou art fast 
fettered in the noose of Death. Having done this foul turn 
unto that high-souled one, repairing whither, shalt thou obtain 
respite ? Shall not that strong and heroic Raghava, skilled 
in all weapons, who without his brother, in the twinkling 
of an eye, in battle slew fourteen thousand Rakshasas, slay 
thee, who earnest away his beloved wife ?” Thus and in 
other ways, Videha’s daughter, lying on the lap of Ravana, 
overwhelmed with fear and grief, indulged in piteous lament- 
ations. And the wicked (R&vana) with a shaking frame 
carried away the daughter of the king extremely distressed, 
speaking much, and speaking piteously, uttering lament- 
ations, and putting forth endeavours (to free herself.) 



SECTION LIV. 



CjARRIED away (by Ravana), Vaidehi, not finding any 
defender, saw five principal monkeys stationed on the top 
of a hill. Thereat, that lady of expansive eyes and surpass- 
ing charms, in the hope that they might convey the intelli- 
gence unto RSLma, flung off in their midst her gold-gleaming 
silken sheet, and elegant ornaments. But the Ten headed 
80 




634 



RAMAi'ANA. 



one owing to hurry did not observe the throwing of the 
cloth along with the ornaments. Those foremost of monkeys 
having tawny eyes observed with winkless eyes the large- 
eyed Sita as she was giving way to grief. And the lord of 
RSkshasas, passing beyond Pamp&, directed his course 
towards the city of Lanka, taking Mithila’s daughter along 
with him, indulging in lamentations. Experiencing the 
height of delight, Ravana ravished her, taking her on his lap, 
like a sharp-toothed serpent of virulent poison. And speedily, 
like an arrow shot from a bow, he, coursing the welkin, 
left behind woods and streams and mountains and 
pieces of water. And coming to the abode of Vanina, that 
refuge of rivers, the exhaustless ocean — the home of 
whales and alligators, he crossed over it. In conse- 
quence of the carrying away of Vaidehi, Varuna’s abode, 
from grief, had all its waves stilled and its fishes and 
mighty snakes inert. — And the Ch3ranas uttered in the 
heavens these words, “O Ten-headed one, this is thy 
end.” Thus did the Siddhas then say. And taking Siti 
on his lap, representing his own Death, — who endeavoured 
(to liberate herself), Ravana entered the city of Lank&. And 
entering the city of LankS, vast, with all its highways 
well-arranged, and with people thronging its gates, he 
entered his own inner apartment. Then Ravana set Sitl 
there, having eyes with dark outer corners, exercised with 
grief and dole ; as if Maya had set his own Asura Illusion 
(in his own palace). Then the Ten-headed one spoke unto 
some female friends of terrible visages, “Let no man or 
woman behold SitS. without my permission. And I command 
that, should she ask for pearls, or rubies, or gold, or apparel, 
or ornaments, the same should be rendered unto her. She 
that, whether knowingly or unknowingly should say anything 
unpleasant to Vaidehi, would hold her life cheap.” Having 
said this unto the R&kshasis, the puissant lord of the R&ksah- 
sas, went out of the inner apartment, and thought within 




IranyakXndam. 



635 

himself as to what was to be done (next). And he saw 
eight flesh-eating Rakshasas of wondrous prowess. And 
seeing them, the exceedingly powerful (Ravana), blinded 
by the bestowal of the boon, after extolling their strength 
and heroism, addressed them, saying, “Equipped with 
various weapons, do ye speedily take yourself to Janasthana, — 
that field of carnage — which ere this contained the abode 
of Khara ; and casting off fear at a distance, do ye 
sojourn in vacant Janasthana with all its Rakshasas slain 
(by R&ma). A great many troops endeued with exceeding 
prowess, who had been posted in Janasthana, have, along 
with Dushana and Khara, been slain by the shafts of Rama. 
Hence unprecedented is my wrath, towering above my 
patience ; and great and fierce also is the hostility I have 
conceived against R§ma. I wish to avenge myself on my 
mighty enemy. Sleep find I none without slaying my foe 
in fight. Slaying that slayer of Khara and Dushana, Rama, 1 
shall attain delight like unto that attained by a pauper on 
gaining riches. Staying in Janasthana, ye shall gather true 
information touching RSLma as to what he is about. Repair 
all ye rangers of the night carefully, and strive yourselves 
always for slaying R3ma. I have been well acquainted with 
your strength in many a field, and it is for this that I set 
ye in JanasthSna.” Hearing these agreeable and weighty 
words of Rlvana, those Rakshasas, bowing down unto 
Rlvana, left LankSL, and in a body invisibly proceeded in 
the direction of Janasthana. Having obtained Mithila’s 
daughter, RSLvana experienced great joy in establishing her 
(in his own house) ; and having created high hostility with 
Rlma, R5vana through blindness rejoiced greatly. 




636 



RlMXYANA . 



SECTION LV. 



Having commissioned those eight terrible and mighty 
Rakshasas, Ravana, in consequence of perversion of sense, 
considered himself as crowned with success. And brooding 
over Vaidehi, he, sore pierced by the shafts of K&ma, hastily 
entered his charming mansion, with the intention of seeing 
Sita. And entering that apartment, RSvana— lord of 
R&kshasas — saw the distressed Sit& in the midst of the 
Rakshasas, with a tearful countenance, oppressed with a load 
of grief, like unto a bark sinking in the ocean through 
the violence of the winds ; like unto a doe separated 
from the herd of deer, and surrounded by dogs. Coming to 
Sita disconsolate in consequence of stress of sorrow, remain- 
ing with her head bent down, that ranger of the night, the 
lord of the Rakshasas, forcibly shewed unto her that man- 
sion resembling the mansion of the celestials, thick with 
palaces and lordly piles, inhabited by thousands of females ; 
containing birds of vaious kinds ; furnished with various 
gems ; with beautiful pillars of ivory gold and crystal 
and silver, studded with diamonds and lapises. Rlvana in 
company with Sita ascended the beautiful golden stairs, 
resounding with the sounds of kettle-drums and embellished 
with ornaments of burnished gold. And those loftly edifices 
had excellent windows made of ivory and silver, and covered 
with golden nets. The ground all over was decorated with 
ambrosia and gems. The Ton-headed one in his own mansion 
shewed unto Maithilee large tanks and pools covered with 
various kinds of flowers. (All this) R&vana shewed unto 
Sita overmastered by sorrow. And after having shewed 
unto Vaidehi the whole of that goodliest of mansions, that 
wicked one, with the intention of tempting SitS, spoke unto 
her, saying, “O Sita. leaving out old men and boys, I am 
the lord of thirty two kotis of night-rangers of terrible deeds. 
And a thousand come forward whenever required for any 




IlRANVAKINDAM . 



637 



service.— If such is my sovereignty, all this is established 
in thee, O large-eyed lady, as well as my life. Thou art 
dearer unto me than life. O Sita, be thou the mistress 
of those numerous excellent women who are my wives. Dear, 
be thou my wife. This is for thy good. Why shoudst thou 
act otherwise ? Do thou relish my speech. Do thou bend thy 
mind towards me. It behoves thee to favor me, who am 
burning (in the heat of desire). This Lank§. measuring an 
hundred Yoyanas girt round by the ocean, is incapable of 
being harassed by the celestials themselves headed by Indra. 
Neither among the celestials nor Yakshas nor Gandharbas 
nor Serpents, find I any one that can match me in prowess. 
What wilt thou do with Rama a human being of short life, 
poor, of small prowess, practising mendicancy ? O Sita, 
bend thy mind unto me. I am a fit husband for thee. O 
timed one, youth is uncertain. Sport with me here. And, 
O thou of a handsome countenance, do not wish for the 
sight of Raghava. O Sita, what power hath he to come 
hither even in thought ? None can fetter the exceedingly 
fleet wind in the sky, or hold the bright flame of a burning 
fire. O beauteous one, in these three worlds I find no one 
that can by his might carry thee away, who art protected 
by my arms. Do thou govern at Lanka this extensive 
kingdom. The like of me and celestials and all that are 
mobile and immobile shall be thy servants. Laving thy 
limbs with water, do thou gratify me. The evil that thou 
hadst done, hath been expiated by thy life in the forest : now 
do thou reap the fruit of thy good deeds. Here are garlands 
furnished with divine fragrance, and, O Maithili, superb 
ornaments. Enjoy thou all those along with me. O thou 
of shapely hips, the car called Pushpaka, resembling the sun, 
which (formerly) belonged to my brother Vai^avana, was 
through my prowess won by me in fight. And vast and 
beautiful is that car furnished with the speed of the mind. 
Do thou, O Sita, at thy pleasure sport on it along with me. 




6 3 8 



rAmAfana. 



Thy face stainless and lovely to look at, resembling the lotus, 
doth not, O thou of a comely countenance, O magnificent 
damsel, appear beautiful in consequence of thy being exer- 
cised with grief. 0 When Ravana had spoken thus, that 
best of females Sita muffling up her moon-like countenance 
with the ends of her cloth, began to shed gentle tears. 
Thereat the heroic ranger of the night, Ravana, said unto 
Sita, distressed, sunk in thought, and deprived of her splen- 
dour through anxiety, *0 Vaidehi, banish bashfulness, which 
stan3s in the way of one's duty. The yearning I feel after 
thee is in consonance with what the sages prescribe. These 
tender feet of thine I press upon my heads. Do thou speedily 
shew thy favor unto me. I am thy slave (ever) obedient 
unto thee. Let not these words of mine spoken by me under 
the withering influence of love prove fruitless. Ravana hath 
never bowed his head to any female.” Having said this, 
the Ten-headed one, come under the subjection of the Des- 
troyer, looked upon Maithili, Janaka’s daughter (as his 
own) saying, “She is mine.” 



SECTION LVI. 



H aving been thus addressed, Vaidehi unaffected by 
fear, although exercised with grief, placing a blade of grass 
between herself and Ravana, answered him, saying, “There 
was a king named Da^aratha, the bridge of righteousness, 
like unto a mountain, ever bearing regard towards the truth, 
and renowned among men, whose son is Raghava. He is 
named Rama, and is righteous-souled and celebrated over the 
three worlds. He is long-armed, of expansive eyes, — like 
unto a celestial — he is my husband. Born in the race of the 
Ikshw&kus, .he hath the shoulders of a lion and is possessed 
ol exceeding effulgence — the same that along with his 




iRAIiYAKlNDAM. 



639 



her, Lakshmana, shall take thy life. If thou hadst 
tged me forcibly in his presence, thou wouldst have Iain 
attle in Janasthana even as Khara.' All the mighty 
shasas of grim visages, whom thou hast extolled (before 
shall be deprived of their venom before Rama, as 
ents are before Suparna. The shafts decorated with 
shot by the bow-string of Raghava, shall pierce their 
es, as the waves of the Ganga (beat against) her banks, 
ough, O R&vana, thou mayst be incapable of being 
, either by the gods or the Asuras, yet having roused the 
hostility of Raghava, thou wilt not be able to liberate 
life. The strong RSghava will compass the end of what 
lins of thy life. Like the life of a beast tied to the 
ificial stake, thy own is incapable of being reclaimed, 
uld Rama look at thee with eyes aglow with anger, thou, 
akshasa, wouldst be consumed even as Manmatha was by. 
ra. He who is able to bring down the Moon or destroy 
, and to drink up the ocean dry, will surely liberate Sita 
1 here. Thy days are numbered, and auspiciousness 
bidden thee adieu. Thou art shorn of strength, and thy 
;es have been dulled. And it is owing to thee that 
ka shall be subject to widowhood. That thou by force 
for naught carried me away from the side of my husband 
is sinful act can never conduce to thy felicity. That 
;edingly effulgent lord of mine along with my husband's 
iger brother, summoning up their energy, is fearlessly 
lling in the vacant Dandaka. By means of an arrowy 
ver in conflict, he will take thy prowess and strength, 
hauteur and wickedness out of thy person. When urged 
he Destroyer, the destruction of creatures is perceptible, 
i, coming under the sway of the Destroyer, men become 
rless in- their actions. Having outraged me, thou, O 
st of R&kshasas thy time come ; for compassing thy own 
auction as well as that of the Rakshasas and those dwell- 
in thy inner apartment. A Chandala cannot tread the 




640 



rAmAvana. 



dais reared in the midst of a sacrifice beauteous with ladles, 
and vessels, and sanctified by the twice-born ones. So I, 
the religiously wedded wife of that one, ever intent on virtue, 
and (always) firm in my vows, is incapable, thou vilest of 
Rakshasas, of being touched by thee, a sinner. How can 
the female that hath always ‘sported with her mate amidst 
lotuses, cast her eyes on a shag staying among rushes. Do 
thou either bind or destroy this body deprived of sensation. 
This body will I not protect, nor yet this life, O Ravana ; 
and I shall not be able to bring blame on myself in this 
world. ,, Having said these harsh words in wrath, Videha’s 
daughter, Janaki, did not there again say anything unto 
Ravana. Hearing Sita’s words, harsh and calculated to 
make one’s down stand on end, Ravana answered her in 
words tending to excite one’s apprehension, “Hear, O 
Maithili, my words. O damsel if, O thou of sweet smiles, 
within this time thou do not turn thyself unto me, the cooks 
shall cut thee off in pieces to serve my morning meal.” 
Having herself spoken thus, Ravana, — challenger of foes— 
growing exceedingly wroth, addressed the Rakshasis in 
these words, “Ye frightful Rakshasis terrible to behold, 
subsisting on flesh and gore, do ye at once crush her pride.” 
As soon as he had said this, those frightfnl and terrible 
Rakshasis with joined hands encircled Maithili. Then the 
grim-visaged king Ravana, as if riving the earth by his 
tread, proceeding a pace or two, said, “Do ye take Maithili 
to the wood of Asokas. There surrounding her, do ye 
secretly guard her; and there ( sometimes) by storming, and 
(at others) by means of soft speech, do ye all strive to bring 
Mithila’s daughter, like a wild female elephant, under your 
- sway.” Thus commanded by Ravana, those Rakshasis 
taking Maithili along with them, went to the Asoka wood, 
abounding with trees granting every desire, and filled with 
various kinds of fruits and flowers ; and frequented by fowls 
fraught with juices at all seasons. And as a doe comes 




IRA NY A KlNDA M . 



64I 



under the subjection of tigresses, Janaka’s daughter, Maithili, 
her frame worked up with grief, came under the sway of the. 
Rakshasis. And like a female deer fast bound by a trap, 
Janaka’s timid daughter Maithili, agitated by the mighty 
grief, did not attain respite. And greatly up-braided by 
the fierce eyes ( of the Rakshasis), Maithili did not know 
repose; and, afflicted with grief'and fear, she, remembering 
her beloved lord along with Lakshmana swooned away. 



SECTION L V I. 

Having slain the Rakshasa, Maricha, able to wear 
shapes at will, who had been ranging in the form of a deer, 
R&ma speedily turned back along the path. On Sita having 
entered LankS, the great father addressed the gratified 
Devendra of an hundred sacrifices, “For bringing about the 
weal of the three worlds, and the woe of the Rakshasas, 
Sita hath been taken into Lank£ by the wicked-minded, 
Rivana. Devoted unto her husband, the exalted lady always 
brought up in happiness, not seeing her husband, and 
seeing ( on the other hand ) environed by numbers of 
Rakshasis,— is hungering after the sight of her lord. 
The city of Lanka is situated on the shores of the lord of 
rivers and streams. How can R&ma get a knowledge of 
that blameless one, staying there ? Brooding over the 
various ills she hath undergone, that exceedingly rare damsel 
is passing her days. Surely she will resign her existence. 
Great is the dou^t that hath arisen as to Sita putting a 
period to her existence. Having thyself from here, do thou 
see the fair-faced Sita. Having entered the city of Lanka, 
offer excellent clarified butter.” Thus addressed by the 
reverend chastiser of Paka, Devendra in company with 
sleep, approached the city ruled by Rav^na. He then 
81 




642 



R Ull YANA. 



addressed sleep, saying, “Go thou ; and stupify the Rik- 
shasas.” Thus accosted by Maghavat, that goddess, 
exceedingly delighted, for securing success to the work of 
the celestials, covered the RSLkshasas with stupor. In the 
meanwhile, that god, the thousand-eyed lord of Sachi went 
to (Sita) staying in the woods, and spoke unto her these 
words, “I am the sovereign of the celestials. Good betide 
thee ! 1 am here, O thou of luminous smiles ! For securing 
success unto the work of the magnanimous RSghava, I will 
lend my aid unto thee. Do not, O daughter of Janaka, 
grieve. Through my grace, he shall along with his forces 
cross over the ocean. And, O excellent wench, I have by 
my supernal power, stupified the R&kshasis. And, O Sitt, 
for this reason, I along with sleep, taking these rice, — rice 
boiled in clarified butter, have, O Vaidehi, come unto thee. 
If thou partake of these from my hand, thou shalt never 0 
beuteous one, be afflicted either with hunger or thirst, 0 
thou of thighs resembling rambhd (trunks), for years.” 
Thus addressed, Sita, alarmed, said, “How can I know thee 
for Devendra, Sachi's husband, staying here ? By the side 
of RSma and Lakshmana, I had beheld the signs of the 
celestials. If, O Devendra, thou art thyself the sovereign 
of the celestials, show those unto me.” Hearing Sita’s 
words, the lord of Sachi did accordingly. He did not touch 
the earth with his feet, and his eyes remained winkless. He 
bloomed in youth, and the blossoms did not fade on his 
attire. Thereupon knowing him for Vasava, Sita was over- 
joyed. And weeping, she spoke regarding R&ghava, "By 
luck it is that I had heard of that mighty-armed one along 
with his brother. As is my father-in-law, the king, as is 
the master of Mithila, so art thou (unto me), thou whom I 
behold to-day ; my husband hath now found a protector.— 
And by thy command, O Devendra, will I partake of 
this payasa cooked with milk, which hath been offered 
unto me, and which shall enhance (the prosperity) of our 




iRANFAKlNDAM. 



64 3 



race.” Thereupon taking the payasa from Indra’s hands, 
that Maithili of luminous smiles (mentally) offered it unto 
her husband as well as Lakshmana. “If my mighty lord live 
along with his brother, let this through my reverence 
for them, be theirs.” She then partook of the payasa 
herself. Having thus eaten it, that one of excellent coun- 
tenance, had her hunger and rising sorrow removed ; 
and attaining a mental tendency from Indra, Janaki grew 
glad with reference to the Kakutshthas. And Sakra also for 
bringing about the success of RSghava’s work, with a pleased 
mind, went to the abode of celestials. And greeting Sita 
again and again, that high-souled celestial, in company with 
sleep went back to his own abode.” 



SECTION L V 1 1 • 



■X 1LL1NG the R&kshasa, Miricha assuming shapes at will 
and ranging in the shape of a deer, Rama vended speedily his 
way. And as he hurried himself, eager to behold Maithili, 
jackals began to howl hideously at his back. Hearing their 
harsh cries, capable of making one’s hair stand on end, 
Rlma struck with fear at the voices of the jackals, became 
filled with alarm. “Ah! I consider this as inauspicious— 
that these jackals are crying. Escaping being devoured by the 
R2Lkshasas, may fair fortune befall Vaidehi! If Laksh- 
mana should have heard the cries w’hich Maricha, knowing 
my voice, and fixing on the means of harming me, uttered 
in the form of a deer, Saumitri, hearing that voice, leaving 
Mithil&’s daughter and commissioned by herself, must have- 
come near me. Surely, the R&kshasas in a body are desirous 
of slaying Sit5. Becoming a golden deer, Maricha, having 
allured me far, transformed himself into a R&kshasa, as soon 




644 



RlMlYANA. 



as he had been struck with my shafts ; and exclaimed, 1 Ah ! 
.Lakshmana, slain am I. ’ It is doubtless, we having left 
(Sita), whether all is well with her. I having raised the 
hostility of the Rakshasas for the sake of JanasthSna ; and 
many and dreadful are the omens I see (around me)." 
Thus reflecting as he heard the howlings of the jackals, the 
self-possessed* Rama with hasty steps returned to the 
asylum. RSghava went back to Janasth&na, alarmed in 
consequence of his having been drawn away by the 
Rakshasa in the form of a deer. And birds and beasts 
approached that high-souled one distressed and depressed 
in spirit ; and staying on his left set up frightful crie9. As 
he was witnessing the exceedingly dreadful signs, RSghava 
saw Lakshmana coming with a lacklustre (countenance); 
and Lakshmana came up to Rama. And depressed in spirit, 
he was rendered still more sad by that one who, afflicted 
with depression shared his sorrow. And, seeing that 
( Lakshmana ) had come, leaving Sita in that solitary wood 
frequented by Rakshasas, his brother fell to reprimanding 
him. And taking Lakshmana's left hand, the son of Raghu 
in extreme distress sweetly spake these rough words, “Alas! 
Lakshmana, thou hast committed a censurable act ; leav- 
ing Sita, O mild one, thou hast come hither. Is it well 
with her? I make no doubt, O hero, but that Janaka's 
daughter hath either been slain or devoured by Rakshasas 
ranging the forest. And, considering the many omens that 
take place before me, O Lakshmana, I do not know whether 
wc shall light upon welfare of Janaka’s daughter Sita being 
alive, O best of men. And as these multitudes of beasts 
and these jackals arc crying frightfully in the flaming direc- 
tion,* I do not know, O thou of mighty strength, whether it 
is well with that daughter of the king. This Rakshasa, who, 
wearing the shape of a deer, and, alluring me, had drawn me 
far, hath in some sort been slain by me with much ado ; 



• i. e. The quarter presided over by the sun, vis., the East.— T. 





ARANl’AKANnAM. 



645 



and he became a Rakshasa at the time of his death. Yet 
my mind is poor and cheerless ; and my left eye throbs. 
Doubtless, O Lakshmana, Sita is not, — she is either carried 
away, or dead, or is wandering on the way. 



SECTION LVI I I . 



Seeing Lakshmana cast down, cheerless, and come with- 
out Vaidehi, the righteous son of Dasaratha, asked him, 
saying, “Where, O Lakshmana is that Vaidehi, who hath 
followed me unto the Dandaka forest, and leaving whom thou 
hast come hither ? Where is that one of a slender waist, 
who is the help in trouble of me, deprived of my kingdom, 
dispirited, and running about the Dandakas ? Without whom, 
Q hero, I cannot live for a moment — where is that life’s 
help of me Sit§ resembling the daughter of a celestial ? O 
Lakshmana, without Janaka’s daughter (hued) like burning 
gold, I covet not the sovereignty of the celestials or the 
earth. Liveth Vaidehi, dearer unto me than life ? Shall » this 
exile of mine be of no avail? O.Sumitra’s son, on my 
dying for Sit§. and thy returning (to the city,) shall Kaikeyi 
have her desire, and attain felicity ; and shall Kau^alya,— 
her son dead, and herself wearing the guise of a female 
mendicant, humbly wait upon Kaikeyi when she shall have 
succeeded in obtaining the kingdom for her son ? If Vaidehi 
live, I will then return to the asylum ; but O Lakshmana, if 
that one of excellent character should happen to be dead, 
I will also renounce my life. If, O Lakshmana, Vaidehi 
ever preluding her speech with a smile should not speak to 
me when I arrive at the asylum, I shall give up my life. 
Do thou tell me, .0 Lakshmana, whether Videha’s daughter 
liveth or not ; or whether, in consequence of thy acting heed- 
lessly, that forlorn wench hath been devoured by R&kshasas. 




C46 



rAmAyana. 



Of a tender frame, and a mere girl, Vaideki, never having 
experienced unhappiness being cast down, surely weepeth 

for my separation. When that exceedingly wicked R&ksliasa 
cried, “Lakshmana” at the top of his voice, wast thou 

also seized with fear ? And I apprehend that voice resem- 
bling mine was heard by Vaidehi; and, despatched by her 
from fear, thou mayst have come hither swiftly to see* me. 
Thou hast every way acted unwisely in having left Sitl 
alone in the wood. By this thou hast afforded opportunity 
to the cruel Rakshasas to repair the mischief (I have done 
them). The Rakshasas subsisting on flesh are aggrieved 
because of Khara having been slain $ and now, without doubt, 
those terrible ones have slain Sitli. Alas ! absolutely sunk 
am I in peril, O destroyer of foes. What shall I do now ? 1 
fear such an event was appointed for me.” Thus think- 
ing of SitS, paragon among women, RSghava hastily went 
to JanasthSna in company with Lakshmana. Taking to 
task his younger brother of distressed visage, R&ma, afflicted 
with hunger and thirst, and dejected in spirits, sighing 
heavily with a countenance turned pale, entered the asylum 
and found it vacant. And entering his own asylum, that 
hero went to the play-grounds (of SitS) and remembering 
the sporting ground (of SitS) in that abode, he was filled 
with grief and his down stood on end. 



SECTION LIX. 



T hen coming out of the hermitage, Raghu’s descendant, 
R&ma, after a while, from grief, spake these words to the 
son of SumitrS, “When confiding myself in thee, I had left 
Maithili with thee in the wood, why then didst thou go out, 
leaving her behind ? O Lakshmana, directly I saw thee 



* Some texts — to rescue me,—T. 





iRANFAKlNDAM. 



647 



approach, renouncing Maithili, my mind, apprehending great 
wrong, became really aggrieved. O Lakshmana, seeing thee 
coming at a distance, renouncing her, my left eye and arm 
as well as ray heart keep throbbing.” Thus accosted, 
Lakshmana having auspicious sign?, afflicted with great grief, 
said unto the aggrieved R&ma, “I have not come hither, of 
my own accord, renouncing SitSL ; but I have come to thee, 
having been urged thereto by herself with rudeness. The 
cries of “O Lakshmana, save me,” as if uttered by the 
master, came to the ears of Maithili. ; Hearing those 
distressful . accents, Maithili from affection [ for thee ], 
breaking out into lamentations, and overwhelmed with fear, 
spoke unto me, “Off,” “off.” On being repeatedly urged, with 
“Go,” I answered Maithili in these words, tending to inspire 
her confidence, 'I do not see such a Rakshasa, as can excite 
his fear. Do thou desist. These cries do not come from him ; 
but must have been uttered by some one else. How can he 
that can rescue the celestials themselves, utter, O Sita, such 
a blame-worthy and base word as — save [me]? Some one 
for some purpose, assuming my brothers voice, is crying — 
O Lakshmana, save me. O beauteous lady, these words, Save 
me — must have been uttered by some Rakshasa from fear. 
Thou shouldst not act like a mean woman. Do not be over- 
whelmed ; and banish thy anxiety. There breathes no 
person, nor yet shall there be bom any one in these 
three worlds who in the field shall vanquish Raghava 
in fight. R&ghava is incapable of being beaten in battle 
by the very gods headed by Indra. 1 Thus addressed 
(by me) Vaidehi, deprived of her sense, shedding tears, 
spake unto me these cruel words, ‘Thou cherishest the vile 
idea that on thy brother perishing, thou shalt come by me ; 
but me thou shalt never have. As thou dost not go to him 
albeit he is crying loudly (for help), thou followest Rama in 
consonance with a hint from Bharata. A foe going about in 
disguise, thou followest Rama for my sake, prying into 




6 4 8 



kAmAyana. 



Raghava’s draw backs; and it is for this that thou dost not 
go (to him) V Thus accosted by Vaidehi, I, with eyes red- 
dened in wrath, and my nether lip swollen in ire, rushed 
out of “the asylum.” When Saumitri had spoken thus, Rama 
transported by grief, said unto Lakshmana, “O gentle 
one, thou hast done wrong in having come out hither 
without her. Although thou knewest (full well) that 1 was 
able to withstand the R&kshasas, yet didst thou sally 
out at the angry words of Mithiia’s daughter. I am not 
pleased with thee that hearing her harsh speech spoken 
in wrath, thou hast come hither, leaving Vaidehi behind. 
Thou hast every way done wrong in not acting out my 
mandate in consequence of being urged by Sita, and under 
the influence of indignation. That Rakshasa lieth low, 
being wounded by my shafts— that had drawn me away from 
the asylum wearing the form of a deer. I hit him stretching 
my brow slightly and fixing the shaft on it j when, renoun- 
cing his deer-form he became a Rakshasa wearing a bracelet 
and began to emit distressful shrieks. Wounded by my 
shaft, he, assuming my voice, and in accents capable of 
being heard from far, uttered those dreadful words fraught 
with dole, hearing which, thou hast come hither, renouncing 
Mithiia’s daughter.” 



SECTION LX. 



As Rama went on, his feet failed him, his left eye began 
to beat, and a, trembling came over his frame. Seeing 
again and again all these signs, he continually kept on asking 
(Lakshmana), “Is it well with Sita?” Eager to behold 
Sita, he proceeded fast ; but finding the abode empty, he was 
filled with anxiety. And proceeding with swiftness, throw- 
ing about his limbs, Raghu’s son began to survey all around 




ARAA FA KIND AM. 649 

the hut. He then found it empty of Sita, like unto a tank 
in evil plight and bereft of lotuses— during the winter. And 
seeing the cottage empty, with its trees as if sorrowing, and 
its flowers faded, and its beasts and birds sunk in gloom, — 
shorn of grace, worn out, forsaken by the sylvan deities, 
strewn with deer-skins and Ku^a, and twists of Kasa, he 
wept again and again — “Hath the timid one been carried off, 
or is she dead, or hath any one eaten her up, or hath she 
vanished (from the earth), or hath she gone to the wood, or 
hath she gone to cull flowers and fruits, or hath she gone to 
the pool for procuring water, or hath she repaired to the 
ri\erf’ Although he searched his beloved one carefully, 
yet he failed to find her out in the wood-land. And that 
graceful one with his eyes reddened with grief, seemed like 
a maniac. And he rushed from tree to tree, and bewailing 
being sunk in an occean of grief traversed all the rivers and 
mountains. “ O Kadamba , hast thou seen where is that one 
fond of Kadamba groves V If knowest thou this do thou tell 
me of SitS. having an auspicious countenance. O Bilya , tell 
me pray, if thou hast seen her, wearing silken cloth, resembl- 
ing cool leaves and having breast like unto Bilya fruits. Or, 
O AryunS, she was very fond of thee, tell me if liveth 
that daughter of Janaka of slender frame. This Kakuva 
knoweth for certain about Maithilee having thighs like unto 
Kakuva . Yon stands beautifully that Banaspati being en- 
veloped with creepers, flowers and leaves and filled with the 
hum of Vramaras . Surely doth this Tilaka know about her 
who was fond of her. O Asoka> who doth remove sorrows, 
do thou make good thy name by making me, who am exer- 
cised with grief, see instantly my beloved (spouse). O Tala , 
if thou hast any pity on me do thou tell me whether thou 
hast beheld that fair damsel having breast resembling ripe 
Tala fruits. Do thou tell me without fear, O Jambhu, if 
thou hast seen my dear one resembling in hue the river 
Jambhu. O Karnikar , thou appearest very beautiful with this 
82 




650 



RUlXYANA. 



blossoming flowers, tell me if thou hast seen my dear 
devoted wife who was fond of thee.” Thus the highly famous 
R£ma asking about Sita, nearing the various trees such as 
mangoe, Nipa, Mahasala, Panama, Kurava, Pomegranate, 
Vakula, Pumnaga, Sandal and Keta began to traverse the 
forest like a maniac. Again addressed he the diverse 
animals — ”0 deer, knowest thou for certain about J&naki 
having the eyes of a doe ; is she engaged in play with the 
does ? O elephant, methinks thou dost know about the 
daughter of Janaka having thighs resembling thy trunk; 
pray tell me if thou hast beheld her. O tiger, fearlessly do 
thou relate unto me if thou hast seen my beloved Maithilee, 
having a countenance resembling Moon. Odearl O thou 
having eyes like unto lotuses! why dost thou flyaway? 
Surely have I seen thee. Why dost thou not address me 
hiding thyself behind the tree? Wait, wait, O thou fair 
damsel, thou hast no compassion for me ! Never hadst thou 
mock me before in this way ! Why dost thou neglect me 
now ? O exquisitely fair damsel, truly have I found thee out 
from this thy yellow silken cloth. I have seen thee flying away. 
Stand if thou hast any love for me. Or, O thou having a sweet 
smile, thou art not she ; truly thou hast been killed or else thou 
wouldst not have neglected me at this time of dire affliction. 
True it is that she hath been devoured in my absence by the 
RAkshasas living on flesh having torn into pieces her limbs. 
Truly hath her face, resembling the full-moon, having beauti- 
ful teeth a fine nose and white Kundalas, become of 
pale countenance being brought under the possession of the 
RSkshasas. Her neck had the hue of sandal and was adorned 
with necklace — that beautiful tender neck was eaten up by 
the RSkshasas, my beloved wife wailing. Her arms were 
tender like leaves and adorned with various ornaments ; truly 
have the R&kshasas eaten them up, shaken as they were, by 
throwing them here and there. Alas ! did I leave her alone 
only to be devoured by the R&kshasas ? And she hath been 




iRANFAKlNDAM. 



651 



eaten up like one weak and helpless albeit she has many 
friends. O Lakshmana, O thou of mighty-arms, hast thou 
seen where my dear wife is ? O dear ! O SitSL ! where hast 
thou gone ?” Bewailing again and again in this strain RSma 
began to range the forest. Sometimes leaping, sometimes 
walking in an uncertain direction, again and again he looked 
like one void of sense. And again intent on searching Sita he 
furiously engaged in traversing the rivers, mountains, fountains 
and the woods. He could not wait paitently anywhere. 
Entering a vast forest he searched every nook and corner for 
Maithilee ; his desire was not satisfied and he again engaged 
with great labour in the finding out of his dear spouse. 



SECTION LX I . 



Beholding the hermitage and cottage desolate and the 
seats strewn here and there, RSma the son of Da^aratha 
looked around. And finding Sita nowhere he raised up his 
beautiful arm and broke out into lamentations saying, “O 
Lakshmana where is Sita ? Where has she gone hence ? O 
Saumitri, who hath carried away my dear one or who hath 
devoured her ? O Sit5, if wishest thou to mock me, hiding 
thyself behind the tree, enough — enough it is — console me 
who am exercised with grief. O pleasant Sita, without thee 
these faithful little deer have engaged in meditation being 
bathed in tears. Without Sita I shall not breathe, O Laksh- 
mana. A mighty grief hath overtaken me in consequence of 
her being carried away. My father the monarch shall surely 
behold me in the next world and ask me ‘ I engaged 
thee in the observance of a vow ; without fulfilling that, why 
hast thou come here ? O shame on thee P For certain shall 
my father address me with these words relating to my 
passionate, false and base conduct. All my desires have now 




652 



RliMlrANA. 



been baffled and I have lost all control over myself and have 
been exercised with grief. O fine damsel, O thou of slender 
waist, where dost thou repair leaving me behind like unto 
fame renouncing a person of vicious nature? Without thee 
1 shall renounce my own life. 19 Being desirous of seeing 
Sita, Rama afflicted with grief began to bewail in this strain, 
but did not behold the daughter of Janaka. Being sunk in 
grief on Site's account he became worn out like unto an 
elephant fallen in mud. Thereat for his well being, Laksh- 
mana spoke unto him saying, t: 0 thou of mighty intellect- 
do not grieve. Do thou put forth thy endeavours along with 
me. There is that high hill, O hero, containing many a 
cave. Maithili who is fond of ranging the forest and ever 
delighteth in beholding the flowery woods, must have entered 
therein or have gone to the watering-place blooming with 
flow’erets and lotuses. She has gone to the river abounding 
in fish and Banjulas or has hidden herself somewhere in 
the forest to frighten us and to know, O best of men, how 
we can search her out. O thou of great beauty, let us soon 
engage in quest of her. O Kakuthstha, if thinkest thou 
that she is somewhere in this forest, we shall leave no 
quarter untried. Do thou not grieve.” After Lakshmana had 
spoken thus out of fraternal affection, R&ma, with a composed 
heart, set out along w ith him in quest of Sita. And search- 
ing every nook and corner of the mountains, rivers, ponds, 
table-lands, hills and summits they found Siti nowhere. And 
searching thus all the mountains* R5ma spake unto Lakshmana 
saying “Behold not I the auspicious Vaidehi on this mountain, 
O Saumilri.” Ranging the entire forest of Dandaka, 
Lakshmana, sore distressed, spake unto his brother of flaming 
energy, saying “Surely shalt thou come by Maithili the 
daughter of Janaka like unto the mighty armed Vishnu 
obtaining this earth after having bound Vali.” Being thus 
addressed by the heroic Lakshmana, RSghava, greatly afflicted 
with sorrow, replied in piteous accents— “O thou of mighty 




AranyakAndam. 



6 53 



intellect I have searched every nook of this forest, this pool 
abounding in blown lotuses, and this mountain containing 
many a cave and fountain ; but nowhere have I seen Vaidehi 
dearer than my life.” Thus bewailing Rama, racked with 
sorrow consequent on Sit* being carried away, became 
poorly and afflicted with grief and swooned away for some- 
time. He lost his sense and his whole frame was worked 
with grief. Being gi'eatly anxious and breathless he sighed 
hot and fast and began to lament. And sobbing again and 
again the lotus-eyed Rama bewailed with his voice choked 
with the vapour of grief, exclaiming “Ah Sit& ! ” Thereat his 
dear brother Lakshmana, aggrieved, consoled him with joined 
hands. But passing by the words dropping from Lakshmana’s 
lipsRima again and again bewailed not beholding his dear 

Sita. 



SECTION LXI I . 

— 2 9 — 

Not beholding Sita the virtuous-souled Rama, of mighty 
arms, having eyes resembling lotuses, beside himself with 
grief, lamented (in many a way). Pierced with the shafts of 
Manmatha, Raghava, as if beholding Sita though he actually 
did not see her, uttered the following piteous accents — “O my 
dear, thou delightest greatly in flowers. Covering thy own 
person with Asoka twigs thou art increasing my grief. Thy 
thighs are like unto the trunks of plantain trees and thou 
hast hidden thyself behind the plantain grove. But I per-* 
cieve thee, O fair one, thou art incapable of keeping thyself 
hidden. O auspicious one, thou hast entered smiling the 
Karnikar grove. No more with thy pastime, O dear one, 
leading to my death. Moreover it is not proper to sport in 
this way in a hermitage. I know it full well, O my dear, 
that thou art by nature fond of pastimes. But O thou of 




654 



RlMlVANA . 



expansive eyes, this cottage lieth desolate, do thou come here. 
Evident it is that Sita hath either been devoured by the 
Rakshasas or carried away by them, and therefore she doth 
not approach me, O Lakshmana, who am thus bewailing. 
These deer, O Lakshmana, with tearful eyes have been as if 
declaring that Sita. hath been devoured by the night-rangers. 

0 chaste one, O thou of exquisitely fine hue, O worshipful 
madam, whither hast thou repaired ? O Sit§, truly bath 
the desire of Kaikeyi been fulfilled to-day. I came out with 
Sita and shall return home without her. How shall I enter 
again that inner apartment void of Sita? Surely shall the 
people blame me as being cruel and destitute of energy. 
That I have no prowess hath already been manifested in the 
destruction of Sita. When the king Janaka shall come to 
me after my return home from exile, to ask me of my welfare 
how shall I meet him ? And surely shall he be overwhelmed 
with grief on his daughter’s account when he shall find me 
without Sita. Blessed is my father since he is in heaven now. 

1 shall not repair to that city protected by Bharata. Without 
her even the heaven itself appears to me as desolate. Do 
thou therefore repair to the city of Ayodhya leaving me in this 
forest. By no means shall 1 breathe without her. Embracing 
him warmly do thou tell Bharata, as instructed by me— 
‘Rama hath given thee permission to administer this 
kingdom. 1 As ordered by me do thou with proper respect 
salute all my mothers Kau^alya, Kaikeyi and Sumitrl and 
protect them all with great care and respectful compliments. 
O destroyer of foes, do thou relate at length unto my mother 
the story of Sit&’s destruction.” Rftma bewailing thus, being 
overwhelmed with grief on account of his separation from 
SitSt having a head of fine hair, Lakshmana became of pale 
countenance and was greatly distressed at heart. 




iRANFAKlNDAM. 



<>55 



SECTION LXI II. 



That son of a king, stricken as he was with grief conse- 
quent upon separation from his dear one, was again over- 
whelmed with a terrible grief after causing sorrow unto his 
brother. Sunk in the abyss of grief, Rama, sighing hot and 
weeping piteously, spoke unto Lakshmana who was equally 
aggrieved, words worthy of being said on that occasion. 
“Methinks there is none other on this earth like me, the 
perpetrator of vicious crimes. My heart or soul is not 
riven though crushed again and again without respite 
with a multitude of doleful events. Surely did I per- 
petrate many a vicious deed in my previous birth, the 
fruit of which I do now suffer and in consequence where- 
of misfortune after misfortune hath befallen me. Coming 
within the compass of my remembrance, the loss of 
my kingdom, the death of my father, the separation of my 
mother and other kinsmen culminates my grief. Repairing 
unto woods, O Lakshmana, in Site's company my grief was 
assuaged, nay I did not suffer physical affliction even. With- 
out SitA these sorrows have grown anew like unto fire 
flaming again by means of fuel. Truly my wife, timid as she 
is, hath been carried away by a Rakshasa by the etherial 
track. Alas I doubtless it is, that one of pleasant accents, 
wept piteously out of fear many a time and oft. For certain 
my dear wife's breast round and sprinkled as it was with 
red sandal paste, was bathed in blood (while devoured by 
the R&kshasas) — but there is no death for me. That 
countenance the beauty of which was enhanced by a 
head of curly hair and which used to emit forth tender, 
soft and clear accents, hath become pale, being taken 
possession of by the RAkshasas like unto the Moon almost 
devoured by R&hu. Surely have the Rakshasas subsisting 
on gore drunk her blood in the sky tearing off the neck 




656 



RImJlVANA. 



of my dear one ever devoted to pious observances. Surely 
did that one of beautifully expansive eyes cry aloud 
poorly like unto a hind when she was drawn hither and 
thither by the Rakshasas encircling her in the forest in my 
absence. O Lakshmana, sitting at the foot of this hill with 
me that large-hearted, pious Sita, of smilling countenance, 
used to address thee on many a topic. This is Godavari, 
the best of rivers, my dear wife took delight in her— 
has she gone there ? — But she never goes there alone. Or has 
Janaki having eyes resembling lotus-petals hath gone to bring 
lotuses ? But how is that possible, she never goes without 
me to bring lotuses. Hath she entered at her pleasure 
this forest filled with many flowery trees and diverse birds ? 
But that is not possible too — she is timid and feareth much 
to enter alone in this forest. O Aditya, knowest thoir the 
pious and vicious actions of men ; beareth thou testimony to 
the truth and untruth of their actions — do thou tell me, pray, 
who am striken with grief, whither hath my dear one 
repaired, or whether hath she been killed ? O Air, there 
is nothing on earth which is not within the compass of 
thy vision, do thou relate unto me whether Sita preserving 
the fame of my ancestry, hath been killed or carried away 
or if she waiteth on the w'ay.” After R5ma had bewailed 
thus being beside himself with grief, Saumitri, ever treading 
the right path and not of poorly mind spoke words worthy 
of being said on that occasion. — ‘'Do thou take heart renounc* 
ing thy grief and engage with energy in quest of SitL 
Persons of high energy are never exhausted on the earth 
even in the face of arduous works." The highly powerful 
Lakshmana having spoken thus being afflicted with grief, 
Rama, the best of Raghu’s descendants, did not consider that 
worth pondering over. Renouncing patience he again in- 
dulged in excessive grief. 




ARAA Y A kAnda m. 



657 



SECTION L X I V. 



XJ/AMA stricken with grief spake ulito Lakshmana the 
following piteous words saying, “O Lakshmana, do thou 
speedily repair to the river Godaveri and learn if Sita hath 
gone there to fetch lotuses.” Being thus addressed by Rama, 
the quick-paced Lakshmana went to the pleasant stream 
Godaveri. Reconnoitering full well the river containing 
many a watering-place Lakshmana spake unto Rama saying, 
“Searched have 1 all the watering-places but have found 
her nowhere— anon I cried aloud but she did not hear. 

I cannot trace whither hath Vaidehi of slender waist re- 
paired ever assuaging our mental affliction.” Hearing 
Lakshmana’ s words, Rama, aggrieved and overwhelmed with* 
sorrow repaired in person to the river Godaveri. Arriving 
there cried he “Where is Sita?” Neither did the 
world of creatures nor the river Godaveri apprise Rama 
of Sita’s being carried away by the Lord of Rakshasas 
worthy of being slain. Thinking of the terrible figure and 
monstrous actions of that vicious-souled Ravana, that river 
did not dare relate unto him anything about Sita, albeit 
appointed by the creatures to relate the story concerning her 
and accosted by Rama in piteous accents. Being thus dis- 
appointed by the river in beholding Sita, Rama racked with 
her separation spake unto Lakshmana saying “O thou of 
auspicious looks, this river Godavari doth give no reply. But 
O Lakshmana, returning without her what shall I say unto 
Janaka and Vaidehi’s mother? Where hath that Vaidehi 
gone who used to assuage my grief who had been deprived 
of kingdom and living in this forest on wild fruits 
and vegetables ? Nights shall appear too long unto me, 
keeping late hours being deprived of my kinsmen^and 
relatives and not beholding Vaidehi. I can range this 

83 




658 



RlMlYANA. 



Mandakini, this Janasthana and this Pasrabana hill if I can 
find Sita there. Behold, O hero, the high deer have been 
casting their looks again and again at men ; methinks from 
their gestures, they intend speaking something unto me.” 
Beholding them, Rlghava, the best of men, looked at them 
and said in accents choked with vapour — “Where is Sit&t” 
Being thus addressed by that Lord of men the deer rose up 
all on a sudden and looked up to the sky facing the 
south and proceeded to the direction by which Maithili 
had been carried away. And moving by that way these deer 
eyed the Lord of men and again and again fixed their 
looks upon that way and earth and passed along emitting 
cries which was marked by Lakshmana. He marked with 
attention their movements and cries and spake unto his elder 
brother like one aggrieved saying — “Being accosted by thee 
•with — ‘Where is Sita?* these deer have stood up all on 
a sudden and have been pointing to the south and earth — 
let us therefore proceed in this direction — it may be that 
we shall either meet with that worshipful madam or find 
some mementos concerning her.” Thereat K&kuthstha, gifted 
with supreme beauty, proceeded towards the south being 
followed by Lakshmana and casting his look upon the earth. 
While proceeding thus, conversing with each other the two 
brothers beheld some flowers scattered on the high-way. 

Beholding a collection of flowers scattered on earth, Rlma, 
exceedingly sorry, spake unto Lakshmana in piteous accents 
saying “O Lakshmana, I have come to know that these are the 
flowers of the forest I gave Vaidehi ; with these she decorated 
her hair. Me thinks the sun, the air and the famed 
earth have preserved them for my well-being.” Having 
spoken these words unto Lakshmana, the best of men, the 
virtuous-souled R&ma, of mighty arms, addressed the moun- 
tain in front of him containing many fountains, saying— “0 
thou the best of mountains, hast thou beheld in this picture- 
sque forest-land, that exquisitely fine damsel Jacked with 




AranvakAndam. 



*59 

my separation ?” Exceedingly wroth he accosted the 
mountain like unto a lion addresing a little deer, saying 
“Show me my graceful Sit£ hued like gold before I crush 
down thy summits . 1 9 Being thus addressed by Rama on 
Maithili’s account the mountain did not show him Sit5. 
Again addressed him R&ma — “Thou shalt by the fire of my 
arrows, be reduced to ashes — thy twigs and leaves shall be 
totally destroyed and no one shall resort to thee. O 
Lakshmana, I shall dry up this river Godavari if it telleth me 
not about Sit5. having a moon-like countenance.” Rama, 
exceedingly wroth, cast his looks around as if desiring to 
burn everything with his’ eyes and beheld footprints of the 
R&kshasas on the earth as well as those of Sita moving 
wildly hither and thither, terrified and desirous to see Rama, 
while pursued by the R5kshasas. Beholding these footmarks, 
the snapped bow, the quiver and the chariot broken into many- 
pieces, Rama, terrified spake unto his dear brother. “Behold 
O, Lakshmana, the remnants of Vaidehi’s golden ornaments, 
strewn hither and thither, and diverse garlands. Behold O 
Saumitri, the earth covered with drops of blood resembling 
golden drops. Methinks, O Lakshmana, Vaidehi hath been 
devoured by the Rikshasas assuming shapes at will, having 
sundered her in pieces. O Saumitri, there took place a terrible 
conflict between the Rakshasas, fighting with each other on 
Sit&’s account. O gentle one, whose is this snapped bow 
lying on the breast of the earth adorned and crested with 
pearls and diamonds ? O brother, this belongs either to the 
celestials or to the R&kshasas. Whose is this golden armour 
lying shattered on earth, resembling the newly risen sun, in 
color and adorned with sapphire ? Whose is this umbrella 
lying broken on earth, containing a hundred rod and 
adorned with celestial garlands ? In whose conflict have these 
terrible asses, of large proportions, having faces of demon 
and with breast plates, been killed ? Whose is this shattered 
war-car lying upset on the ground and broken flag resembling 




660 [XAmAFANA. 

in lustre the burning gold ? Whose are these terrible 
arrows feathered in gold, measuring four-hundred fingers, 
lying without blades on earth? Behold, O Lakshmana, these 
two quivers have been totally spoiled though filled with arrows. 
Whose charioteer is this who hath been killed with reins 
and lash in hands ? These foot-marks must be some 
RSkshasa’s. I made these R&kshasas my fatal enemies, 
assuming shapes at will and of crooked hearts. Poor Sita 
must have been either dead, carried away by them or devoured. 
Virtue did not save her from being carried away in this 
mighty forest. O Lakshmana, while virtue did not protect 
Janaki being devoured or taken away by stealth, what person 
else gifted with heavenly power, on this earth shall bring 
about my well-being ? For this it is that people through 
ignorance disregard the ever kind Almighty — the lord of crea- 
tures and the best of the celestials. Truly shall the celestials 
regard me as one devoid of prowess, who am mild-tempered, 
kind, ever engaged in the welfare of the humanity, and have 
controlled all my senses. Observe, O Lakshmana, obtaining 
me as the stay these accomplishments have been turned 
into so many blemishes. Truly shall my prowess manifest 
itself to-day overshadowing all my other accomplishments 
for the . destruction of the R&kshasas and all created 
beings like unto the rising of the Sun casting the Moon into 
shade on the day of dissolution. None shall enjoy felicity, 
O Lakshmana, — Yakshas, Gandharbas, Pigachas, Rakshasas, 
Kinnaras, or human beings. Today shall the welkin be 
filled up with my arrows. Motionless shall I make all the 
animals inhabiting the three worlds. I shall arrest the move- 
ment of the planets and overshadow the Moon. Stopping 
the course of the wind and destroying the rays of the Sun 
and fire I shall envelope the earth with darkness, crush down 
the summits of the mountains, dry up the pools, blow up the 
creepers, demolish the Ocean and erradicate the trees. If 
the celestials do not give me back my Siti* I shall bring 




ARANYAKANDAM. 



66 1 



about the dissolution of the three worlds which would else 
have been wrought by time. O son of SumitrS, instantly 
shall the celestials headed by Indra, meet with my prowess, 
if they do not give back my Sita, ever advancing my 
wellfare. None shall be able to range the welkin. Behold 

0 Lakshmana, being perpetually crushed down by my 
arrows shot off my bow, the world shall be disturbed and 
dislodged and the animals and birds shall be confused and 
destroyed. Stretching the bow to my ears I shall make the 
world, for Sit&'s sake, void of Pisachas and Rakshasas with 
my arrows incapable of being withstood by created beings. 
To-day shall the celestials behold the power of my arrows 
coursing a long distance shot through my ire. Three 
worlds destroyed on account of my wrath, celestials, 
Danavas, Pisachas or R&kshasas, — none shall be saved. The 
dwellings of the celestials, Asuras, Yakshas and Rakshasas 
shall fall down sundered by my arrows into diverse pieces. 

1 shall dislodge the whole world by my arrows. If the 
celestials do not give me back my Vaidehi dead or carried 
away or as she was before, I shall destroy the whole 
world mobile or immobile and disturb all with my arrows 
until I see her.” Having spoken thus, Rama, with his eyes 
reddened with ire and lips swollen, tying fast his bark and 
deer-skin, braided his matted locks. Having done this, being 
exceedingly wroth he looked like Rudra about to destroy 
Tripura. Thereat taking his bow from Lakshmana and 
holding it fast, the effulgent Rama, the conqueror of foes, 
fixed flaming arrows to it like so many serpents and said 
being exercised with ire like unto fire on the eve of disso- 
lution. — “O Lakshmana none shall be able to withstand 
me, who am inflamed with rage, as debility consequent 
on old age, death, time, duty are incapable of being averted 
from their destined ends by the animals. I shall bring about 
a mighty revolution in the world containing the celestials 
GandharbaS; human beings, Pannagas and the mountains, if I 




RlMlVANA. 



6f2 

io not get back, in her pristine beauty, my Sit£, the daughter 
of the King of MithiUL” 



SECTION LX V . 



I&ama highly aggrieved on account of Sit&’s being carried 
away, addressing himself to destroy the world like’ unto the 
(ire of dissolution and casting his look, sighing again and 
again, upon the stringed bow like unto Mahadev desirons 
of burning down the whole world at the time of dissolution, 
Lakshmana, having his* countenance dried up, beholding his 
rage not seen before, began with folded hands — “Ere this 
thou hadst been gentle, self-controlled and engaged in the 
welfare of all beings. It doth not behove thee now to 
renounce thy natural temper being influenced by ire. Ever 
manifested itself in thee, glory par excellence like unto 
splendour in the Moon, lustre in the Sun, motion in the wind 
and forgiveness in the Earth. It becometh thee not to de- 
vastate the whole world for the crime of an individual being. 
Methinks for certain, this shattered car must be the property 
of an individual person, not of many. But I do not know 
whose is this car with yokes and dresses and what for it 
hath been shattered ? Behold, O thou the son of a King, 
this terrible spot bathed in blood and raked with hoofs and 
wheels. Surely here took place a conflict. O thou the fore- 
most of those skilled in speech, it appeareth from these signs 
that this skrimish did take place with one, not with two. 
Here are not to be seen the fool-marks of a large army. It 
therefore doth not behove thee to destroy the whole world 
for one's individual offence. Kings, gentle and mild by 
nature, do always administer punishment, proportionate to the 
amount of offence. Thou art always the stay and the best 
refuge of all animals. Who shall think well, O RSghava, of 




IranvakXndam. 



663 



the destruction of thy wife ? The celestials, Danavas, 
Gandharbhas, rivers, seas, and mountains — none can act un- 
friendly by thee as the learned priests cannot act improperly 
towards those initiated by them. It is thy duty, O king, with 
bow in hand to search out the person who hath carried away 
Sit5, along with me and the devotees. Explore shall we, with 
great care, the seas, the forest, the mountains, the fearful caves, 
the pools and the abodes of the celestials and Gandharbas 
until we find out the person who hath carried away thy wife. 
If the celestials do not return thee peacefully thy wife, O 
Lord cf Ko£ala, thou shalt adopt measures, befitting 
the occassion. Thou shalt then uproot the whole world, O 
lord of men, with thy gold-featherd arrows resembling the 
thunderbolt of Mahendra,if thou dost not come by thy wife by 
resorting to good conduct, self-control, lowliness and polity.” 



SECTION L X V I . 



Rama bewailing thus like one helpless being stricken with 
grief, overwhelmed with sorrow and losing control over him- 
self, Lakshmana touched his feet and consoling him instantly 
began : — *'By constant asceticism and manifold pious observ- 
ances king Da9aratha obtained thee like unto the celestials 
obtaining ambrosia. As I have heard from Bharata, king 
Da^aratha died for thy separation, attached as he was unto 
thee for thy accomplishments. O Kakuthstha, if dost thou 
not bear patiently this impending peril what little-minded 
person else shall bear it? Compose thyself, O thou best of 
men. Peril overtaketh every body like unto fire but vanish- 
cth in no time. This is the nature of men. Yayati, the son 
of king Nahusha, though attained to the state of celestials, 
was however thrown down for an iniquitous deed. The 
hundred sons, that had been born unto our ancestral pritst 




66 4 



XImATANA. 



Vasishtha, were all killed in one day. O lord of Ko^ala, even 
Vasumati, the mother of the world, adored of all beings, 
meeteth with mesery consequent upon earth-quake. Even 
the mighty Sun and Moon witness eclipse who are the eyes 
of the world and the very images of virtue and in whom 
the whole world is stationed. O thou best of men, what of 
insignificant beings cased in this frail body, even the mighty 
creatures and celestials are subject to the influence of 
destiny. I have heard, O best of men, even the celestials 
headed by Indra are subject to happiness or misery. So 
it doth not behove thee to bewail thus. O descendant of 
Raghu,it becometh thee not to lament like an ordinary person 
even if J&n&ki is dead or hath been carried away. O RAma, 
persons, highly experienced and ascertaining right or wrong 
without being moved, do not lament even in the face of 
mighty perils. O thou best of men, do thou, after due consi- 
deration, ascertain what is proper or improper ; persons of 
thy vast wisdom are cognizant of the right or wrong by dint 
of their understanding. Without proper exercise, actions, of 
unknown merit and uncertain issue do not bear fruits. 0 
hero, many a time and oft ere this, thou hadst given me the 
self-same counsel. Who is capable of counselling thee who 
art the very preceptor of the gods f O thou of great intellect, 
even the celestials cannot measure thy mental acumen. 
Greatly benumbed is thy wisdom with the slumber of grief, 
and i am to rouse it. O thou the best of Ikshakus, do thou 
engage in the destruction of thy foes considering well thy 
celestial and human prowess. O thou best of men, what 
necessity hast thou to destroy the whole world ? Do thou 
rescue SitA after finding out thy vicious enemy/' 




1 RA NFAKlNDA M. 665 

SECTION LXVII. 



.After Lakshmana had spoken these highly sound and 
pleasant words, R 5 ma, ever taking to what is sound, accepted 
them. Thereupon that one, of mighty arms, slaking his 
flaming ire and reclining himself upon his beautiful bow, 
addressed Lakshmana, saying, “Do thou ponder over, O 
brother, where shall we repair, what shall we do and by what 
means shall we come by Sita ?” Whereto Lakshmana replied 
saying unto the highly aggrieved Rama, “It is proper for 
thee to search this Janasth&na filled with a multitude of 
Rikshasas and covered with diverse trees and creepers. 
Here are many strongholds in the midst of mountains, clefts 
of rocks, many caves and numerous cavities filled with various 
animals. Many are the abodes here belonging to the 
Kinnaras and Gandharbas. t)o thou, along with me, search 
all these places. Great men, of thy calibre, do remain un- 
agitated even in the midst of difficulties like unto mountains 
never shaken by the velocity of the wind.” Hearing these 
words, Rama, enraged, fixing sharp and terrible arrows to his 
bow, began to range the forest with Lakshmana. Thereupon 
he beheld, fallen on ground, having his person bathed in blood, 
the king of birds — Yat&yu, resembling a mountain peak, and 
spake unto Lakshmana, saying “It is clear and beyond all 
doubt that Vaidehi hath been devoured by this Rakshasa, as- 
suming the shape of a vulture and ranging the forest. This 
Rakshasa hath been reposing at ease after devouring that 
one of expansive eyes ; I shall kill him with terrible straight- 
coursing arrows, having flaming points.” Fixing sharpened 
shafts to his bow, Rama, enraged, darted towards the vulture, 
as if moving the sea-girt earth. Vomitting frothy blood 
YatSyu, the king of vultures, spoke unto R 3 ma, the son 
of Da^aratha, saying “O thou of long life, that goddess, 
84 




(66 



MmXyana. 



whom thou hast been searching in this vast forest like unto 
Oshadhi \ and my life have been carried away by R&vana. I 
saw her, O RAghava, carried away stealthily by the powerful 
R&vana, in thy absence as well as that of Lakshmana. Myself 
Hearing Sit &, for her rescue, O Lord, R&vana was thrown down 
On earth by me in conflict having his car and unbrella shatter* 
ed. This is his snapped bow and these are hi9 broken shafts* 
And this is his war-car, O RAma, shattered in fight. This 
is his charioteer lying on earth being killed by the velocity 
of my wings. Having sundered my wings with his dagger, 
Who had been exhausted, R&vana taking Sit&, rose high up 
in the welkin. It behoveth thee not to kill’ me who had been 
Wounded before by the R&kshasa." Hearing from him 
pleasant words relating to SitU, RAma, leaving aside, instant* 
ly, his mighty bow, embraced him, and rolling on earth 
having lost self-control through grief, began to lament with 
Lakshmana. Though highly . composed by nature, he was 
Overwhelmed with doubled grief. And beholding Yat&yu, 
sigh again and again and breathing with difficulty in a helpless 
plight, R2tma, highly aggrieved,spake unto Lakshmana saying, 
•*I have lost my kingdom and have been living in this forest. 
My Sit& hath been carried away and this bird hath been 
killed (on my account) — This misfortune of mine can burn 
even the very fire. If for assuaging my grief I do enter the 
mighty ocean, verily shall that misfortune dry up even that 
lord of rivers. There is none so unfortunate as I, throughout 
this earth, mobile or immobile, and it is for this bad luck 
that I have confronted this mighty disaster. This mighty 
king of vultures is our fathers friend and he lieth on earth, 
killed through the evil turn of my fortune.” Uttering these 
and various other words, Rftghava, along with Lakshmana 
touched his body manifesting his paternal affection. Em- 
bracing the king of vultures, bathed in blood, having its 
wings cut off, R&ghava, fell on the ground, exclaiming 'where 
hath Maithilee gone like unto my life ?* 




iRANFAKlNDAOt. 



667 



SECTION L XV 1 1 1 . 



J3eH0LDING Yat5yu fallen on the ground by the terrible 
Rfikshasa, RSma spoke unto Lakshmana, having compassion 
for all, saying “Verily for my service this bird hath breathed 
Its last, being killed by the R&kshasa. O Lakshmana, its 
voice hath been enfeebled, its vision weakened and its life, 
greatly exhausted, lieth in a .very little proportion in its 
body. May good betide thee, O YatSyu ; if thou art capable 
*>f speaking again, do thou relate how Sita hath been carried 
away and thou hast been killed. Why hath Ravana taken 
away by stealth the worshipful jSnakif What offence did 
I commit by him that he hath carried away my dear one? 
O thou best of birds, how looked the moon-like, pleasant 
countenance of Sita at the time of her being carried away ? 
What did she speak then ? What is the prowess, appearance 
and action of that Rakshasa? Where doth he live, 
O reverend Sir? Pray tell me, I do ask thee.” Beholding 
Rama, lament like one helpless, the virtuous-souled Yatayu 
spake in faltering accents — “Sita hath been carried away 
by Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, creating a mighty illusion 
producing wind and showers. O darling, myself being worn 
out that night-ranger, having sundered my wings, fled away 
with Sita to the southerly direction. O R§ghava, my life is 
about to expire, my eye-sight hath grown of mistaken 
perception, I see trees before me made of gold having hair 
resembling Ushira .* Ravana hath taken away Sita at a 
moment when a person regains soon his lost property. O 
Kakuthstha, this moment is called Vt'ndya , t which Ravana 

• Andropogon muricatum — (Lat). The root of a fragrant grass. This 
allades to a terrible vision which is generally seen by a person on the eve of 
death— a golden tree having hair.— T. 

t This refers to JatdytCs astrological knowledge. Vindya is derived from 
the root Kid— to gain. Thus this moment is favourable to the loser and un- 





663 



RlMlYANA . 



hath not been able to perceive. (At this moment) the person 
who taketh away (a thing) is soon destroyed like unto a fish 
devouring a hook. Do not therefore entertain the least doubt 
about thy coming by J^naki. Destroying him at the head 
of the battle thou shalt soon sport with Vaidehi.” There- 
upon flesh and gore began to come out of the mouth of 
YatSyu, the king of vultures, not loosing his sense even 
while treading the verge of death.Thereupon the king of birds 
gave up his dear life uttering only. — “R&vana is the son 
of VishravS and brother to Vaishravana (the lord of wealth)." 
Rama again and again addressed him with joined palms say 
ing, “Do thou speak ! Do thou speak." And instantly Yatfiyu’s 
vital spark rose up in the sky, leaving his bodily frame. There- 
upon the king of vultures fell down on the earth by 
stretching forth his legs, body and head on the ground. 
Beholding the vulture dead, of huge proportions, resembling 
a hill and having red eyes, Rama, aggrieved, spoke pite- 
ously unto Saumitri, saying — “Living happily, for years, 
in this forest of Dandaka inhabited by the R&kshasas, Yatiyu 
hath, at last, given up his life. He lived for a long time, of 
an uplifted person, and hath now laid low on the earth. 
None can withstand the course of destiny. Observe, 0 
Lakshmana, this vulture for my benefaction, hath been killed' 
by the powerful RSvana in his attempt to rescue SitSL For 
me, hath this Lord of birds, breathed his last, renouncing his 
large ancestral kingdom. In every status of animal creation, 
the heroic, the righteous and the honest, affording refuge 
unto all, are to be found, even amongst the birds. I do not 
feel so much affliction, O hero, for Sit&’s ravishment as I 
'do for this vulture, who hath been killed for me. Like unto 
the highly famous, effulgent king Da^aratha, this King of 
of birds is worthy of being adored and worshipped by me. 
O Saumitri, do thou bring fuels ; I shall produce fire there- 

favourable to the taker. Hence Ravana carrying away Sit* at this momat 
shall meet with destruction. — T. 





2 RA NV A KASHA M* 



^669 

with and burn the dead body of this king of birds who hath 
been killed on my account. Placing on a funeral pile, I 
shall cremate, O Saumitri, the dead body of this king of birds 
who hath been destroyed by the grim-visaged Rakshasas. 
Being consecrated and commanded by me, do thou, O highly 
powerful king of birds, attain to that excellent state of 
existence, which is reached by persons ever performing pious 
observances, by Ahitagnis* by heroes who are not afraid 
of entering a battle-field and by persons who confer grants 
of land/' Saying this the virtuous-souled Rama, afflicted 
W’ith sorrow, burned the body of the king of birds, placing 
it on the funeral pile, like unto his own kinsman. Entering 
the forest with Saumitri, Rama gifted with prowess, killed 
plump high deer and stretched forth grass and twigs for 
offering oblation to that bird. Taking off the flesh of those 
high deer and clustering it, Rama, of great renown, offered it 
to the vultures in that pleasant forest-land, abounding in 
green grass. Thereupon for his speedy arrival at the abode of 
celestials, Rama recited those Mantras which are being 
uttered by the twice-born ones. Afterwards repairing to the 
river Gadaveri the two princes offered water unto that kingly 
vulture. And offering water unto him according to the 
prescribed rites of the Sastras t those two descendants of 
Raghu, after bathing, performed the Udaka t ceremony for 
that king of vultures. Having been* killed in battle for an 
arduous but glorious work, that king of vultures, consecrated 
by the ascetic-like Rama, attained to an excellent state. 
Having performed the Udaka ceremony for that best of birds 
and considering him in the light of a father they went away 
and entered the forest in quest of Sita like unto the two 
best of celestials — Visnu and Vasava. 

• A Brahman who has preserved a sacred fire kept alive perpetually in a 
family, &c.,— from ahita — placed, agni — fire. — T. 

• Presentation of water specially to the manes as a religious or obsequaj 

rite. — T. * 



ftlAJlYANA. 



670 



SECTION LX I X • 



FT AViNG’offered him the gift of water, those two descen- 
dants of Raghu wended their way in that forest in quest of 
Sita and proceeded towards the south-west. 11. Then turning to 
the south, with how and arrows in hand, they reached a track 
not wended by the people. It was a ghastly, impenetrable 
forest, covered on all sides with groves, trees and creepers. 
Proceeding by the southerly direction, those two mighty 
ones, passed hastily by that terrible, dreary forest. There- 
upon, the highly effulgent descendants of Raghu entered the 
dense forest of Krauncha , situated at a distance of six miles 
from Janasthana . It was a dense forest like unto a collec- 
tion of clouds, as if smiling on all sides blooming with 
charming flowers of diverse hues and frequented by various 
animals and birds. Waiting for sometime here and there 
they, exercised with Site’s ravishment, explored the entire 
forest in quest of Vaidehi. Proceeding three Krosas towards 
the East and passing by the forest of Krauncha the two 
brothers descried on their way the asylum of Matanga. 
Having seen that dreary forest frequented by various 
animals and birds and covered with diverse trees and dense 
groves, the two sons of Da9aratha beheld a cave in the 
mountain, deep as the region under the earth and ever 
enveloped with darkness. Arriving there they espied hard 
by a grimvisaged R&kshasi, having a formidable figure 
ever causing fright unto persons of feeble courage, loathe- 
some, terrible-looking, having a huge belly, sharpened 
teeth, a high person and rough skin, devouring voracious 
animals and looking fearful with dishevelled hair. Beholding 
there the two brothers, RAma and Lakshmana* she neared 
the heroes and saying, ‘ come, we shall sport 1 assailed 

• In this Sloka west is mentioned and in the next one there is mivenot 
to their turning to the south and lienee nest here refers to torth-eia T. 



Iran fa kAndam ; 671 

Lakshmana who had been going before his brother. And 
embracing him she spake unto Saumitri the following 
words “My name is Ayomukhee ; it is a great gain to 
thee that thou hast become my beloved one, O my lord. Do 
thou sport with me, for ever, O hero, in these mountainous 
strongholds and On the banks of the rivers.” Thereat, exer- 
cised with ire, Lakshmana, the subduer of foes, uplifting his 
dagger, chopped off her nose, ears and breast. Having her 
nose and ears cut off, that terrible-looking Rakshasi, emitting 
fearful cries, fled away whence she had come. On her depar- 
ture, proceeding quickly, the two brothers, R£ma and Laksh- 
tnana, the conquerors of foes, reached a dense forest. There- 
upon the highly effulgent and truthful Lakshmana, possessing 
a pure character, spake, with folded hands, unto his brother of 
flaming energy — “My left arm is throbbing, my mind is fillled 
With anxiety and I perceive before me many a bad omen. Do 
thou put on thy habiliments, O worshipful one, and act by 
what I say for thy well-being. Methinks from these bad 
omens some calamity shall soon befall us. O Rama, this 
terrible bird Banchulaka is emitting fearful cries as if 
announcing our victory in the conflict.” Thereupon while 
they began to explore the entire forest with their prowess 
there arose a terrible sound as if breaking down the wood. 
The forest was enveloped on all sides with a mighty wind 
and everywhere was audible a roar filling the wood-land. 
With a view to ascertain whence the sound proceeded, 
Rftma, with a dagger in hand, along with his younger brother, 
espied a R&kshasha of huge proportions, having big thighs. 
The two brothers beheld that Rakshasa stationed before 
them, having a huge body, devoid of head and neck and 
therefore a headless demon and having its mouth on its 
belly. Its body resembled a huge mountain and was covered 
with sharpened down ; its look was terrible like unto sable 
cloud and its roar resembled the muttering where of. Its 
one terrible, expansive ^ye, seeing all, was on J;he fore- 




672 



XAmAVANA. 



head placed on its breast and shone forth like unto the 
flaming fire and it had huge yellow eye lashes. Its month 
was greatly widened and covered with rows of huge teeth 
and it was again and again licking that terrible mouth. And 
stretching forth its two huge arms extending over a yojan* 
it was devouring bears, lions and deer. It was catching and 
throwing with its huge hands many an animal, bird and bear. 
Hindering the way-fare it was awaiting those two brothers. 
And proceeding a Krosa , they espied that fearful, grim-vi sag- 
ed, headless demon, hindering all creatures with its arms, 
terrible-looking and appearing like a kavanda from its very 
situation. Thereupon that one, of huge arms, stretching 
them forth, got hold of those two descendants of Raghu 
crushing them with its strength. Those two highly 
powerful brothers, of mighty arms, with daggers and 
bows in their hands. Were assailed and got l.old of by that 
Rakshasha. R&ma was heroic and patient by nature and 
consequently was not much afflicted $ but Lakshmana was a 
mere boy and impatient by nature and was consequently 
greatly afflicted. Being greatly distressed, the youuger 
brother of R&ghava spake unto him, saying “Do thou behold 
me, O hero, brought under the hold of this R&kshasha, and 
re-nouncing me only, O Rlghava, do thou get thyself off. 
And offering me as sacrifice, do thou escape at thy ease. 
Methinks for certain, O Kakuthstha, thou shalt soon come by 
Vaidehi and regain thy anscestral kingdom. But remember 
me always, O R£ma, when thou shalt find thyself placed on the 
throne.” Being thus addressed by Lakshmana, Rffma spake 
unto Saumilri — “Fear not in vain, O heroj persons of thy 
prowess are never afflicted (with fear'.” Meanwhile the 
wicked headless, demon, of huge arms, the foremost of 
D&naves, addressed the two brothers Rffma and Lakshmana 
— “Who are ye two youthful figures having the neck of t 
bull and with mighty daggers and bows in your hands? 
Arriving in this fearful place ye have by chance come within 




1RANYAKXNDAM . 



673 



the compass of my vision. Tell me now what have ye to 
do here, and what for have ye come? 1 have been waiting 
here being hungry, and ye have come here having daggers 
and bows with arrows in your hands like unto two oxen 
having sharpened horns. Nearing me quickly, it will be 
hard for ye to draw your vital breath.” Hearing those 
words of the vicious-souled Kavandha , Rama having his 
Countenance dried up, bespake Lakshmana — “O thou, 
having truth for thy prowess, again and again, greater and 
worse calamities have been threatening us. We have 
already met with a dire disaster leading to our death, conse- 
quent on my separation from my dear one. Mighty is the 
course of Destiny in all creatures, O Lakshmana. Do thou 
O best of men, behold even thyself and me stricken with 
calamity. But O Lakshmana it is not very difficult for 
destiny to afflict all creatures. Under the influence of 
destiny even the mighty heroes, well habited in armours 
are distressed like unto a bridge of sands.” Addressing 
these words unto Saumitri, the resolute, powerful and highly 
famous son of Dafaratha, having truth for his prowess, com- 
posed himself by dint of his own understanding. 



SECTION LX X . 



Beholding both the brothers, Rtma and Lakshmana, 
clasping each other with their arms, the headless demon 
spake : — “O two best of Kshatryas, are ye waiting here 
beholding me hungry ? O ye having lost your sense, ye have 
been chosen by Destiny as my food.” Hearing those words 
Lakshmana, sore distressed and determined to display his 
valour, addressed R£ma with words worthy of being said on 
that occasion. “This vile Rakshasa shall seize both of us ; 
let us sunder soon its two huge arms with our daggers. 

*5 




*74 



RlMlYANA. 



This grim-visaged Rlkshasa, of huge proportions, gifted only 
with the strength of arms, defeating all other persons, hath 
addressed itself at last to destroy us. It is odious for the 
Kshatryas to make away with those who cannot defend 
themselves like unto animals brought for sacrifice.”* Hear- 
ing their conversation, the R&ksbasa, inflamed with rage, 
widening its terrible mouth, prepared to devour them 
up.t Thereat R&ma and Lakshmana, cognizant of time and 
place, pleased,]; sundered its arms off its shoulders with 
their daggers. R£ma, stationed on the right side§ cut off in 
no time its right arm with his dagger and the heroic 
Lakshmana, the left one. Having got its arms dissevered, the 
terrible- voiced, Kavandha , of huge arms,roaring like unto the 
muttering of clouds and resounding the heaven, earth and 
all the quarters, fell flat on the ground. Beholding both its 
arms cut off, the demon, with its person bathed in blood, 
asked them poorly — “ Who are ye f " Being thus accosted by 
Kavandha , the mighty Lakshmana, gifted with auspicious 
marks, spake unto it, about Kakuthstha. “He is a descendant 
of the Ikshwakus known on earth by the name of Rlma, and 
know me as his younger brother, by name — Lakshmana. 
Being thwarted by mother (Kaikeyi) in his accession of 
kingdom, he, renouncing all, hath fled as an exile unto woods, 
and hath, along with me and his spouse, been ranging this 
forest. While living in the dense forest the wife of Rfima, 
effulgent like unto the celestials hath been ravished by a 
R&kshasa. Searching her, have we come here. Who art 

• The purport i* : — “Lakshmana wanted to chop off the arms of Kmwwwdk* 
and not to put ah end to its life as it was not capable of fighting, being a 
headless demon. And it is not proper for the Kshatryas to destroy those eU 
cannot fight. — T. 

f This has a special significance here— meaning to get hold of them If 
six etching forth its arms.— T. 

t They were pleased because they cut off its arms with ease like tmto tbs 
trunks of a plantain tree. — T. 

$ It may mean also expert.— T. 





IranyarIndam. 



*75 

thou ? And what for art thou ranging this forest like unto 
a headless demon, having thy thighs broken and thy flaming 
face placed on thy breast f" Being thus addressed by 
Lakshmana with these goodly words, Kavandlia , pleased, 
recollecting the words of Indra, bespake him, — “O two best 
of men, ye are welcome ! By my good luck it is that I do 
behold you. By my good fortune ye have dissevered my 
shoulders to-day. Do ye hear. I shall relate truly unto you 
how have I, by my haughtiness, come by this unsightly shape." 



SECTION LX X I . 



MIGHTY armed Rama of great prowess, formerly my 
beauty, beyond conception, was known all over the three 
worlds, like unto the beauty of the Sun, the Moon and Indra. 
I used to frighten everywhere the ascetics living in the forest 
by turning this my beauty into a terrific form. Once 
on a time assuming this terrible shape I assailed and 
enraged the great ascetic Sthulashira collecting diverse 
wild fruits. Thereupon he imprecated curses upon me, 
saying "Do thou retain this ghastly shape hated of all 
mankind." Upon my praying unto that angry ascetic for 
my relief from that curse, he said — “Thou shalt regain thy 
stalwart and beautiful shape when thou shalt be burnt by 
R&ma in a dense forest having got thy arms dissevered by 
him. Q Lakshmana, know me to be the beautiful son of 
Danu. Through Indra's curse in the battle field I have been 
metamorphosed into my present shape. After I had pleased 
him with hard austerites, the Grand-Father of the celestials 
conferred on me a long life. And therefore I was inflamed with 
pride and assailed Indra in a conflict, thinking within me, 
€ l have gained a long life — what can Indra d6 me?’ There- 
upon by his thunderbolt, having hundred edges, hurled 




RlMlYANA. 



676 

off his hands, my thighs were shattered and my head 
thrusted into my body. Myself praying for the close of my 
life, he did not despatch me to the abode of Yama. He only 
said “May the words of the Grand Sire prove true/* Where- 
to I replied * How shall I live long without any food, being 
smitten by thee having a thunderbot in thy hand, and having 
my head, thighs and mouth crushed down ? ' Thereat Indra 
made my hands extending over a Yajana and placed my 
mouth, having sharpened teeth, on my belly. Thenceforth, 
stretching out my long arms I used to devour all lions, 
tigers, wolves and deer ranging the forest. Indra said 
to me, Thou shalt attain to heaven when R&ma, along with 
Lakshmana, shall cut off thy arms in a battle/ Acting 
under the conviction that R&ma, resolved to destroy 
my person, shall surely come within the compass of my arms, 
I do always assail with relish, O worshipful one, O thou 
best of kings, every animal I meet with in this forest. Thou 
art that Rama. May good betide thee, O R&ghava. Verily 
did the great ascetic speak unto me that none should be 
abie to assail me but Rama. Being cremated by you, I shall 
counsel you best and tell you with whom you should 
contract friendship/ 1 Being thus addressed by Danu, the 
virtuous-souled Raghava spake before listening Lakshmana, 
“My renowned spouse Sita was easily ravished by R&vana 
after I had gone out of Janasthana along with my brother. 
I know that Rakshasa’s name only — but do not know his 
whereabouts, his figure and his prowess. It behoveth thee 
to show proper compassion for us, who have been stricken 
with grief, who are helpless, have been ranging this forest 
in this way and are ever engaged in the well-being of 
others * O, hero, we shall burn thee after collecting all the 

* This Sloka may be rendered in another way : — Do thou continue heel- 
fitting us by showing proper compassion for us, who are stricken with graf 
helpless and ranging the forest in this way. We hare however adopted hen 
the commentator Ramanuya’s explanation.—' T. 





IRANVAKHXDAM. 677 

branches that have been broken down by the elephants and 
dried up in time, and digging a big trench. Do thou tell us 
who hath carried away Sita ? And where ? If dost thou know 
it truly do thou perform us this good service.” Thereat 
the Rakshasa, skilled in speech, spake unto Raghava, address- 
ing him thus — “I am not gifted with divine fore-sight and 
therefore do not know where Maithilee is. I shall let you 
know of him who shall be able to tell you all about her, 
after I resume my original shape, being burnt (by thee). I 
shall furthermore tell thee, O Rama, who knows that 
R&kshasa. Without being burnt I am incapable of being 
cognizant of that highly powerful Rakshasa who hath carried 
away thy Sita. By the influence of curse, I have lost my 
fore-sight and by my own improper actions I have been 
transformed into this ugly figure. Do thou cremate me 
according to the prescribed rites after throwing me into the 
ditch before the sun, with his worn out carriers descends into 
the western horizon. Being burnt by thee in the ditch, with 
due ceremonials, O descendant of Raghu, I shall mention, 
unto thee, one who knows that Rakshasa. O Raghava, O 
fleet-footed hero, do thou contract friendship with him gifted 
with good qualities and he shall assist thee. There 
is nothing unknown to him, O Raghava in the three worlds. 
Formerly for some reasons he had travelled all over 
them.” 



SECT I ON lxx 1 1. 



A.FTER Kavandha had spoken thus, the two best of 
men, R2ma and Lakshmana took him to a mountain-cave 
and placed on fire. Lakshmana kindled the funeral pile, 
which was ablaze on all sides. Thereupon the fire 
began to burn down slowly the huge and corpulent body ?f 




RlMlYANA. 



« 7 5 

Kavandha like unto a lump of clarified butter. Afterwards 
the highly powerful demon, shaking the funeral pile, rose 
up quickly like a smokeless flame of fire, wearing a clean 
cloth and a celestial garland. And the graceful demon, 
wearing an unsullied cloth and having all its limbs crested 
with diverse ornaments, rose from the pile high up in the 
welkin with a delighted heart. Thereupon mounting on a 
famed car, brilliant and drawn by swans* and lighting up all 
the quarters with the effulgence of his person, that highly 
powerful one, stationing himself in the heaven, addressed 
R&ma, saying : — “Do thou hear truly, O Righava, of the 
means by which thou shalt come by Sitl. There are six 
expedients.1 O Rama, by virtue of which kings acquire all 
objects. He, in whom misfortune hath culminated, should 
seek the company of one such.J Thou hast, O R&ma along 
with Lakshmana, met with the culmination of misfortune 
and for which thou hast been assailed with such a 
disaster as the ravishment of thy spouse. O thou best of 
my friends, it behoveth thee, therefore to make friends with 
such a person. Or else I do not find any means for thy 
success. Do thou hear, O Rama, what I relate. There liveth 
with four monkeys a heroic, self-controlled monkey by name 
Sugriva, on that best of mountains Rishyamuka % situated on 
the banks of the lake Pampa, being driven by his enraged 
brother Vali, the son of Indra. ’ That mighty, powerful, efful- 
gent lord of monkeys, of immeasurable prowess and truthful 
vows, humble, patient, intelligent, great, expert, bold, grace- 

* By virtue of the pious observances performed by him in his previous 
existence and for his being burnt by Rama that celestial car ap peer s i 
there. — T. 

t The six expedients are as follow — (i) Sandhi peace. (9) Vigraha 
war-fare. (3) Ydna, military expedition against an enemy. ( 4 ) A shman « 
halting. (5) Daidaibkava — sowing dissension. (6) Sammshrmjr* seeking 
protection. — T. 

% This is a moral law referring to the sixth expedient, to be resorted fts 
by the kings— namely Samashrarya or seeking protection.— T. 





iRANVAKlNDAM . 



*79 



ful and puissant, hath been banished by his brother, O hero, 
for kingdom. Surely he shall befriend and assist thee in 
thy search for Sita. Do thou not plunge thy soul in grief. 
O thou best of Ikshwakus, none can withstand destiny on 
this earth, truly unavoidable is it course. Do thou proceed 
soon, O hero, to Sugriv& of mighty prowess, and repairing 
hence even to-day do thou contract friendship with him, 
taking vow in the presence of flaming fire* that ye shall not 
envy each other. Despise not that kingly monkey SugrivS, 
because he is grateful, capable of assuming shapes at will, 
seeking protection and powerful. Ye too are able to accom- 
plish his wished-for object. Benefitted by thee or not, he 
shall engage in thy service. He was begotten of the Sun 
unto the wife of Rikhyraja . He hath been roaming the 
bank of P£mpa being in constant fear of Vali after creating 
enmity with him. Do thou make friends with that monkey 
ranging the wood and inhabiting the Rishyamuka mountain 
after placing thy weapon in the very presence of fire as 
a witness, because that best of monkeys knoweth minutely 
all the abodes of R&kshasas, living on human flesh. There 
is no place under the sun of many rays, O RSghava, O 
slayer of foes, unknown to him. Exploring, with all his 
monkeys, the rivers, huge mountains, strongholds and caves, 
he shall learn about thy spouse. He shall search that 
exquisitely fine damsel Maithili in R&vana’s abode, be- 
wailing on thy separation $ and to find her out he shall 
despatch, O R&ghava, many a monkey of huge proportions to 
various quarters. Whether on the summit of the mount 
Meru or in the region under the earth, that lord of monkeys, 
shall give thee back thy blameless spouse, killing all the 
R&kshasas.” 



• This refers to the oriental custom of performing every sacred rite in the 
pr es enc e of fire as witness . The Hindus regard the fire with sacred rever- 
ence and for this in all their soc.\\ and religious ceremonials fire plays a very 
prominent and sacred part — T. 




6So 



RlMlYANA. 



SECTION LXXIII. 



.Having pointed out unto R§ma the expedient for find- 
ing out Sita the wise Kavandha began with the following 
significant words : — “This is the way, O R&ma, leading to 
the mount Rishyamuka, where ’.stand beautifying the West, 
the Jambu ,(*) Priiila ,(*) Panaca,( c ) Nagrodha,W Plakshafc) 
TindukaJf) Ashathya^g) Karnikarfh) Chuta 9 ( 0 JVdga,(j) 
Tilakaf#) Naktamalff) Neelashok,( m ) CadamvaX") Karavira,(°) 
Agnimukh ya^P) A soka , RaktachandanSd) Pdribhadraka , < r ) 
and many other trees. Ascending those trees or lowering 
them by force on earth, do thou proceed living on those fruits 
like unto ambrosia. Passing by this forest, O K&kuthstha, 
thou shalt reach another abounding in trees blooming 
with flowers like unto the garden of celestials and Uttarkuru 
where in all the months of the year the trees produce fruits 
and honey and where all the seasons dwell as in the forest 

[a] A fruit-tree, the rose apple — Lat . ( Eugenia Jambolana). — T. 

[£] A tree commonly Rival — Lat. ( Buchanania latifolia). — T. 

[c] The bread fruit or Jaka tree — Lat. (Artocarpus integrifolia). — T. 

[</] The I ndian fig-tree — Lat. ( Ficus Jndica). — T. 

[e] Waved haf fig-tree — Lat. Ficus infectoria ). — T. 

[f] A sort of ebony — Lat. (Di^pyros glutinosa ). — T. 

[^] A holy fig-tree — Lat. ( Ficus religiosa). — T. 

[A] The name of a tree commonly Kaniyar — Lat. (P Urosp o rm mm actrift 
Hum). — T. 

fi] The mango — Lat. ( Mangifera Indica ). — T. 

[j] A small tree — Lat. ( Mesua ferrea ). — T. 

[k] A kind of tree commonly Tila. — T. 

[/] A tree — Lat. ( Galcdupaar^orea , Rcx).—T. 

[m] Blue Atoka — Lat. ( Joncsia Asock). — T. 

[rt] A plant commonly Kadamva — Lat. ( Xauclea Kadamba) . — T. 

[o] A fragrant plant — Lat. ( Oleander or Ncrium Odorum ). — T. 

[p] The marking nut plant — Lat. ( Semecarpius anacardium). — T. 

[</] Red Sandal. — T. 

The coral tree— Lat. ( Erythrina fuIgens).—T. 




XRANYAKlNDAM. 



68 1 

of Chaithraratka * There stand beautifully many a free 
lowered down with the burden of fruits, containing towering 
branches, dense as a collection of clouds or a mountain. 
Ascending those trees and lowering them, Lakshmana shall 
offer thee, fruits like unto ambrosia. O heroes, ranging from 
forest to forest, from high mountains to hillocks, ye shall 
get at the lake PampS, void of gravels and acquatic plants 
and hence there is no danger of falling down to the people, 
having level watering-places, covered with sands and bloom- 
ing with red and white lotuses. There emit forth musical 
notes, swans, frogs, cranes and ospreys sporting in the 
lake PampSL They are not filled with terror in view 
of human beings, inexperienced as they are in the matter of 
destruction. O R&ghava, do ye fare on those plump birds 
like unto a lump of clarified butter and diverse fishes such as 
RohitaX ChakratundaX and Nala.% O RSLma, the devoted 
Lakshmana, shall offer unto thee, various other best fishes, 
devoid of scale and fins, plump, filled with bones, having 
destroyed them with shafts and roasted them in fire. And 
after thou hadst feasted on them, Lakshmana shall bring 
thee water for drinking on a lotus leaf, smelling like a lotus, 
coming in contact with flowers, delicious, pleasantly cold, 
wholesome, void of impurities, transparent like silver and 
crystal. And while roaming in the evening he shall point 
out unto thee fat monkeys ranging in the wood and lying in 
the hollows of mountains. And thou too, O best of men, shalt 
behold those fat monkeys, who had drunk water, roaring 
like unto oxen appearing on the banks of a river to drink 
water. And rambling in the evening, thou shalt assuage thy 
grief beholding the pleasant water of PampS. and blossoming 



• The garden of the deity Kuvera. It is derived from Chithraraiha — • 
a Gandkarba in charge of the garden. 

f The Rohi fish — Lat. ( cyprinus Rohita Ham). — T. 
f A kind of fish resembling a wheel in appearance. — T. 

$ A kind of sprat, according to some, a shrimp or prawn.— T. 

86 





68 j 



RlMlYANA. 



trees. There, O RIghava, the Tilakas and Naktamal*kax % 
crested with flowers and full blown white and red lotuses shall 
mitigate thy sorrows. There liveth no person who wears 
garlands of those flowers. Garlands strung with those 
flowers never wither away, O RIghava, because the disciples 
of the great ascetic Matanga lived there with concentrated 
hearts. Drops of perspiration, falling on the earth from 
the persons of those ascetics worn out with the burden 
of the wild fruits collected by them for their spiritual 
guide, have been transformed by virtue of their asceticism 
unto these garlands. These garlands do never wither, O 
RIghava, because of their origination from those drops of 
perspiration. Even at the present day, O Kikuthstha, there 
liveth an immortal mendicant woman, by name Savars] \ who 
had waited in attendance upon those departed ones. Be- 
holding thee, O Rlma,who art adored of all creatures like 
unto the Deity Himself, that mendicant woman, ever 
engaged in pious observances, shall attain to the abode of 
celestials. O RIma, turning to the western bank of 
Plmpa, thou shalt, O Klkuthshtha, behold the incompara- 
ble and secret asylum of Matanga. Fearing the divine 
authority of that great ascetic Matanga, the elephants, 
though there are many, dare not cross the threshold of his 
asylum. O RIghava, this forest is widely known as Matanga- 
wood. Thou shalt sport, O Rima, with a delighted heart 
in that forest resembling the celestial garden — Nanisms 
and filled with various birds. There stands in front of 
PampI the highly inaccessible mount Rtshyamuka , ornament- 
ed with many a blossoming tree and guarded on all sides by 
little serpents. That mount is highly munificient. It was 
created by Brahml in the days of yore. A person, sleeping 
on the summit of that hill and dreaming of an accession 
of wealth, really gets at it after the dream is over. A perpe- 
trator of iniquitous deeds and engaged in impious observances 
ascending that hill, the Rlkshasas seize upon him, asleep, 




1/tA Ny A KTlN DAM. 



til 

and bruise him. Thou shalt hear the terrible roar of the 
young elephants ranging in the asylum of Matanga, 
situated on the banks of PampS. Thou shalt furthermore 
observe many a quickly moving, infuriated elephant, resembl- 
ing clouds in hue and with red temporal juice oozing out of 
their heads, roaming here and there sometimes separately 
and again in a band. Those mighty elephants, roaming 
the forest, return to their woody homes, drinking the plea- 
sant, pure and sweet smelling water of PampS. And do 
thou assuage thy grief, beholding there the bears, wolves 
and Rums of a tender countenance like unto sapphire, who 
are harmless and never afraid of human beings. There 
is a huge cave, O Raima, in that mountain, covered on all 
sides with rocks and where it is very hard to enter. At the 
entrance of that cave lies a beautiful, wide lake of cool water, 
hedged on all sides with trees abounding in fruits. There 
liveth with other monkeys the virtuous-souled Sugriva, who 
sometimes resideth on the summit of the hill. 11 Having thus 
addressed Raima and Lakshmana, Kavandha , highly power* 
ful resembling the sun in effulgence and wearing garlands 
appeared beautiful on the sky. Thereupon R&ma and 
Lakshmana, preparing to proceed spoke unto that great one 
stationed in the sky, saying, “Do thou go.\ Whereto 
Kavandha replied, saying “Do ye proceed to make good 
your end” and bidding them adieu, who were well pleased, 
departed. Regaining his pristine beauty and shining in 
grace and effulgence that Kavandha , who was on the sky, 
fixing his looks upon R&ma, and pointing out unto him his 
way, said “Do thou make friends with (Sugriva). 




68 4 



rXmIyana.. 



SECTION LXXIV. 



_£ hereupon Rama and Lakshmana, sons of a kingly 
father, passing along the way, pointed out by Kavanika f 
leading to the lake Pamp&, proceeded towards the West. 
They wending their way desirous of seeing Sugriva, there 
came within the compass of their vision many trees, grown 
on the summits of the mountains, blossoming with flowers 
and abounding in fruits tasting sweet like unto honey. 
Passing the night on the summit of a hill those two descen- 
dants of Rlghu arrived at the western bank of PampI and 
espied the pleasant asylum of Savari. Getting at that char- 
ming hermitage covered on all sides with trees and casting 
their looks around they beheld that female mendicant— 
Savari \ No sooner had that one of perfect asceticism 

beheld those highly intelligent Rlma and Lakshmana than 
she rose up with folded hands and touching their feet offered 
them duly water for washing their feet and mouth. There- 
upon Rama spake unto that female ascetic, engaged in 
religious services, saying, “O thou of sweet accents, hast 
thou got all hindrances to asceticism removed? Is thy 
asceticism growing stronger every day ? O thou having 
asceticism for thy wealth, hast thou restricted thy anger 
and fare ? Hast thou observed the commandments and 
attained to mental felicity ? Hast thy attendance upon thy 
spiritual guide borne fruits ?” Being thus accosted by Rlma 
that old Savari , of accomplished asceticism and recognised 
by the Sidhas, approaching Rlma spake : — “Favoured with 
thy presence my asceticism hath attained to its consumma- 
tion. Blessed is my birth, fruitful is my service unto my 
spiritual guides and accomplished is my asceticism. O best 
of men, thou art the foremost of celestials ; worshipping 
thee I attain to the abode of deities. O gentle one* 0 




Xraj\ ya k And am. 



685 

slayer of foes, 0 thou that dost confer honors on men, 
thyself casting thy auspicious looks upon me, consecrated 
I, by thy favour, shall attain to the imperishable land 
of celestials. On thy setting foot on the mount Chitrakuta % 
the ascetics whom I served, ascending celestial cars of in- 
comparable lustre, departed to heaven. Those great ascetics, 
cognizant of virtue, said to me, “Rama shall come to thy 
holy asylum." Do thou receive with great reverence that 
guest together with Lakshmana. On beholding him, thou shalt 
attain to that best land of the celestials whence none returri- 
eth. O best of men, I was thus told, by those great ascetics, 
and for thee I have collected various wild fruits growing 
on the banks of Pampa.” Being thus addressed by Savart, 
the virtuous-souled R&ghava spake unto her conversant with 
the knowledge of past and future, saying, “I have heard from 
Danu, in truth, about thy divine authority as well as that 
of thy spiritual guides. If thou purposest so I wish to 
witness it with my own eyes.” Hearing these accents drop- 
ping from Rlma’s lips, Savari showing unto them the vast 
forest said, “Do thou behold, O Raghava, this forest, crowded 
with deer and birds resembling a dense cloud. This forest 
is known as Matanga’s wood. Here in this forest the pure- 
souled preceptors sacrificed unto fire their persons conse- 
crated by the Mantras as Mantra itself. This is that altar 
Pratyaksthaliy ascending which my worshipful preceptors 
used to offer flowers unto the deities with hands trembling 
with toil. Behold, O best of Raghus, this altar of incom- 
parable beauty, by virtue of their asceticism, hath been still 
shedding its lustre on all the sides. Behold, again, the seven 
seas have appeared here in conjunction, at their very thought, 
worn out with fasts and therefore incapable of moving on. 
Even those barks, which they used to place on these trees 
after ablutton have not yet been dried up. These flowers, 
of blue colour which they offered unto the deities, being 
engaged in divine services, have not yet been withered 




686 



RlMlTANA. 



away. Thou hast observed this entire forest and heard 
every thing worth hearing. I purpose now to renounce my 
body being commanded by thee. I wish to approach those 
purc-souled ascetics, whom I used to wait upon, and whom 
these asylums belong to. Hearing with Lakshmana the 
speech of that pious one, Rama gained an excess of joy and 
exclaiming, “Wonderful it is 1” again spake unto Savari 
of keen austerities, — “O gentle one, I have been worshipped 
by thee. Do thou repair at thy ease and pleasure.” Being 
thus addressed and ordered by Rlma, Savari 9 wearing 
matted locks, rags and the skin of an antelope, surrendered 
herself unto fire and rose high up in the welkin like unto 
blazing fire. Adorned with celestial ornaments, wreathed 
with celestial garlands, sprinkled with sandal-paste and wear- 
ing celestial cloth she appeared of exquisite grace and 
lighted up the quarters like unto lightning. By virtue of her 
devout meditation, Savari repaired to that holy region where 
dwelt her spiritual preceptors — the pure-hearted ascetics. 



SECTION LXX V. 



j^LFTER Savari had repaired unto heaven by virtue of her 
divine prowess, R&ma with his brother Lakshmana began 
to ponder over the pious influence of those great ascetics. 
Thinking within himself about the divine authority of those 
great ones, the virtuous-souled Rlma spake unto Lakshmana, 
devoted and ever engaged in his well-being. — “Beheld have 
I, O gentle one, the wondrous asylum of the pure-souled 
ascetics filled with diverse birds and tigers rambling 
friendly with antelopes. O Lakshmana, we have performed 
ablutions in the sacred waters of these seven seas and offered 
oblations unto our manes. Our misfortunes have ended and 
prosperity hath appeared and my mind is now filled with 




iRANYARlNDAM. 



687 



testacy of delight. Me-thinks, 0 best of men, auspiciousness 
shall soon appear unto us $ do thou come, therefore, we shall 
proceed towards the picturesque lake Pampi. Yon appear- 
eth in view, at no distance, the mount Rishyamuka. Here 
dwells with four monkeys, the virtuous-souled Sugriva — 
Suryya’s son, in constant fear of V&li. I am in a hurry to be- 
hold Sugriva the best of monkeys, for my business — Sita's 
quest — is entirely at his hands. 11 Unto the heroic R§ma, speak- 
ing thus, Saumitri said. — “Let us depart soon, I am in haste 
too. 11 Issuing out of Matanga’s asylum, the mighty R&ma, lord 
of men, repaired with Lakshmana to the lake Pampa. Exer- 
cised with grief, he arrived at the bank of that best of lakes, 
beholding (as he passed along), vaious trees and pools, the 
mighty forest covered on all sides with huge trees and flowers 
and resounding with the noise of lapwings, peacocks, wood- 
peckers and various other birds and rattling of the bamboos. 
Beholding, from distance, Pamp5, of sweet, cool and pure 
water, R2ma performed ablution at the Matanga Sara (a 
portion of Pampa) and paced slowly towards the lake. 
Thereupon Dafaratha’s son, stricken with grief, bathed in 
Pampa covered with lotuses. It was adorned on ail sides 
with Tilakas , Asokas, Punagas , Uddalas and Vakulas. It 
was a lake girt on all sides with pictueresque gardens, 
having its waters undulating beautifully and transparent 
like unto crystal, and covered all around with soft sands. 
It was filled with fish and tortoise, adorned with trees on its 
banks, encircled with creepers embracing her like com- 
panions and frequented by Gandharbas , Kinnaras, serpents, 
Yakshas and R&shasas. It was covered with trees and 
creepers of various kind, of cool water, and enveloped 
with beauty. It was, somewhere, of red hue, in contact 
with water lillies, somewhere white with Kumudas , some- 
where blue with blue lotuses like unto a blanket of 
diverse hues. It was filled with white and red lotuses and 
encircled with blossoming nangoe groves and resounding 




688 



RXMXYANA . 



with the music of the peacocks. Beholding Pamp&, orna- 
mented like a damsel with Tilakas, Bijapuras ,(«) fig-trees, 
Sukl acini mas flowery Karavis, blossoming Punnagas tl 

groves of MalatiCO and KundafA) Vandhirasi') Nickulasft i 
Asokas, Saptaparuas,is ) Kc takas, (h) Atimuktasffi and vari- 
ous others trees, Rama the mighty son of Da£aratha began 
to lament with Lakshmana. “There stands on its bank the 
mount Rishyamuka, abounding in various metals and 
covered with trees of varieagated flowers as mentioned 
before :by Kavandha). There dwelleth the famous lord of 
monkeys, SugrivSL, the heroic son of the great Rikshyaraja. 
O best of men, do thou approach the chief of monkeys .’ 1 
Rama, having truth for his prowess, again spake unto 
Lakshmana, saying, “0 Lakshmana, how shall I live with- 
out Sita, who have -been deprived of my kingdom, who am 
poorly and have Sita for my life ?’’ Having said this unto 
Lakshmana, who had nothing else in view, that best of 
Raghus, racked with sorrow and grief and oppressed by 
Cupid, entered the lake Pampa graced with lotuses. Proceed- 
ing slowly, observing the forest, Rama beheld an! entered 
with Lakshmana Pam pi, girt on all sides with beautiful 
woods and filled with a multitude of diverse birds. 

[a~ Common citron — Lai. (Citrus-mcdica) . — T. 

[IS J. at. (Sywf'!»cas rarcmnsti). — T. 

[r] Groat -flowered Jasmine — I.at . (Jasmin n m GrandiflorumJ . 

[«T, A kind of Jasmine— La*. (J. Multifiorum ) . — T 

[«•] I.at. (M>'tn:sa Shisha). — T. 

\f~ I.at. (Harri:;trfat:ia Af:t!iing:t!a). — T. 

Lat. LWt-nia-Si — T. 

fPttudanus OJaratissiuma i). — T. 

Lai. {Gacrtncra Kaccmosa). — T. 

Knp of the Aranyakanoam. 




"\oW.Vor«. 

HUVt'f 
^ -‘V“V • x 4- 
' **i. b*J 

THE 



RAM A YANA. 



KISHKINDHA KANDAM. 



SECTION I. 

^Repairing with Lakshmana to the lake Pampa filled with 
red and white lotuses and fish R£ma having his senses agitat- 
ed began to lament. And beholding there that lake his senses 
were stirred with delight. Troubled with passion he spake 
unto Saumitri saying, — “Behold, O Saumitri, how beautifully 
appeareth PampS of transparent ’water like unto Baidurja, 
graced with full-blown red and white lotuses and various 
trees. Observe again, O son of Sumitra, the picturesque 
wood-land around the lake, where trees, crowned with large 
branches resembling the summits of a mountain, appear like 
so many hills. Mental agony arising from Site’s ravish- 
ment and Bharata’s grief, have been grinding me who am 
already stricken with sorrrow. Verily conduceth to my 
felicity the pleasant lake Pampa of cool water, scattered with 
various flowers, covered with lotuses, highly graceful, girt with 
variegated woods abounding in voracious animals and fre- 
quented by deer and birds. This green common, chequered 
with yellow and blue, appeareth of enhanced beauty by the 
various flowers of the trees as if covered with a blanket of 
8 7 




t>90 



rXmXyana . 



diverse hues. The tops of the trees rich with flowery bunches 
are gnarled with creepers of blossoming tips. Now hath ap- 
peared, O Saumitri, the fragrant spring of pleasant breezes, 
when greatly prevaileth the influence of Cupid and the trees 
are graced with fruits and flowers. Behold, O Saumitri, the 
beauty of the woods, showering flowers like unto clouds 
pouring forth rain. Various trees growing on rocky surfaces, 
moved by the wind have been scattering flowers on the 
earth. Behold, O Saumitri, the wind is sporting as it were 
with flowers dropt, dropping and hanging on the trees. The 
bees, driven off and singing, pursue the wind, moving the 
flowery branches of the trees. While issuing out of the 
mountainous hollows the wind is singing as it were and 
making the trees dance with the musical notes of the delighted 
cuckoos. The wind, making the tops of the trees collide 
with each other, is as it were stringing them together. The 
sandal-cool wind, of pleasant touch, ever removing the 
exhaustion of toil, is blowing every where carrying with it pure 
fragrance. The trees in this nectar-smelling forest are sound- 
ing as it were with the hum of bees. Hillocks overtopped with 
•picturesque and flowery trees stand beautifully on this 
mountainous expanse. Trees with flowery tops, tossed by 
the airy currents and crested with the bees, are as if dancing 
in accompaniment with melodious strains. Behold, the 
Karnikaras covered with flowers appear on all sides like unto 
human beings decorated with golden ornaments and wearing 
yellow cloths. This spring, O Saumitri, sounded by the 
musical notes of the birds hath been kindling my grief who 
am without Sita. Cupid hath been smiting me the more 
who am stricken with grief, and the cuckoos have been defying 
me, displaying their mirth, O Lakshmana. At the pleasant 
fountains the delighted Ddtyuahas with their warblings have 
been afflicting me who am possessed by Cupid. Formerly 
my dear one, while in the asylum, delighted with the music of 
these birds, used to attain to a greater joy addressing me to 




KlSHKINDHlKlNDAM. 69 r 

bear them. Behold, birds of variegated hues, emitting forth 
diverse notes have been alighting upon the trees, groves 
and creepers from various quarters. O Saumitri, birds and 
bees of melodious notes accompanied by their co-mates and 
delighted with their mutual companionship are on the banks 
of this lake. There live happily flocks of delighted vultures. 
The trees sounded by the lascivious murmurs of Datyuhas 
and Punskokilas have been kindling my amour . The fire of 
spring having clusters of Asokas as its embers, the hum 
of bees as its sound, the redness of the twigs as its 
flame, hath been burning me. O Saumitri, of what avail 
is this life unto me, not beholdiug Sita of sweet accents, 
having eyes with their eye-lashes, and a head of curly hair. 
O blameless one, this season, when the groves become 
charming and the border-lands resound with melodious 
strains of the cuckoos, is the most beloved of my 
dear one. Methinks, this fire of distress, originating from 
amorous trouble and enhanced by the influence of spring, 
shall soon burn me down. My amorous feelings shall attain 
to an intense height, as I do not behold Siti before, whereas 
see the beautiful trees around. Sita, away from my vision 
and the spring, drying up perspiration, have been both inciting 
my amour . That one having the eyes of a fawn and ruthless 
vernal breeze, O Saumitri, have been oppressing me who am 
overpowered with anxiety and grief. These peacocks and 
pea-hens unfurling their wings like unto crystal lattices, 
have been dancing hither and thither. These maddened 
peacocks encircled by the pea-hens, have been aggravating 
my amorous desire who am already possessed by the 
Cupid. Observe, O Lakshmana, there danceth with her 
dancing mate on the mountainous expanse, the pea-hen, 
troubled with amorous sentiments. The peacock unfolding 
his charming wings is moving after his dear mate mocking 
me as it were with his cry. Surely the R&kshasa hath not 
brought my dear one in this forest of peacocks and therefore 




692 



RlMlyANA . 



they dance with their mates in this picturesque forest land. 
It is unbearable for me to live without Site in this season of 
flowers. Behold, O Lakshmana, this attachment is to be seen 
even amongst the brutes. The pea-hen being influenced by 
passion is approaching her mate. Site of expansive eyes 
would have thus neared me being influenced by amour had 
she not been carried away. In this season of spring 
flowers of this forest are of no avail to me. These pleasant 
flowers of the trees have been uselessly falling on the 
earth with the bees. The birds exciting my desire have 
been delightedly warbling in flocks as if welcoming each 
other. Surely Site, under the influence of another person, 
is lamenting in the same strain, as I do, if spring hath 
appeared there. Even if spring hath not appeared there 
how can Site having eyes re sembling full-blown lotuses 
live in my separation ? If spring is there, what can it do her 
having a beautiful hip and loins, who hath already been 
overpowered by a mighty enemy ? Surely shall my dear wife 
of a slender make, having eyes like lotus-petals and of sweet 
accents renounce her life at the appearance of this spring ? 
Methinks, for certain, the chaste Site shall not be able to 
maintain her being at my separation. Vaidehi's attachment 
is entirely centred in me and mine in her. This cool breeze 
of a pleasant touch, carrying the fragrance of flowers appears 
like a fire-brand unto me who am thinking of my spouse. 
That breeze appeareth painful unto me in Site’s absence 
which, ere this, had been regarded by me as a source of pleasure 
in her company. This bird set up a cry in the sky at that 
time* and now sitting on the tree is crying delightedly. This 
bird flying up in the sky brought about Si ti’s ravishment 
and this bird shall take me to her having expansive eyes. 

* This refers to the time when Rama was united with Sita 1. #. at the hat 
of his wedding, At that time the bird, flying up in the sky set ap a a in- 
auspicious cry indicating that in no distant time he should be separated boa 
her ; and now his sitting on the tree and cawing delightedly indicated that 
he should soon be re-united with her. — T. 



KISHKINDHliKlNDA m. 



*>93 



Hear, O Lakshmana, the maddening notes of those birds 
sitting on the tops of the flowery trees and setting up their 
melody. The Vramaras are approaching the Tilakas tossed 
by the wind like unto intoxicated damsels. This Asoka , 
enhancing the desires of the amorous, stands here, as if 
remonstrating with me by its clusters shaken by the wind. 
There appear, O Lakshmana, those blossoming mangoe trees 
like unto persons, exercised with passion and smeared with 
unguents of sandal. Behold, O Saumitri, O foremost of men, 
the kinnaras are ranging at large in this varieagated forest- 
land on the banks of Pampa. Here the fragrant red lotuses 
are shedding forth their splendour like unto the newly risen 
sun. Here appeareth beautifully the lake Pampa of trans- 
parent water, filled with blue and fragrant lotuses, swans and 
Karandhabas and abounding in red lotuses like unto the 
virgin rays of the sun and having their filaments crushed by 
the bees. And the beautiful woods around the lake have been 
manifesting their beauty, filled with chakrabakas and the herds 
of elephants and deer desirous of drinking water. Behold, 

0 Lakshmana, the picturesque view of the lotuses oscillated 
by the ripples driven to and fro by the wind. I do not 
delight in my life, not beholding Sita, having expansive eyes 
Wke unto lotus-petals and ever fond of lotuses. O how wily is 
the course of Kama who hath been presenting unto my mind 
that auspicious one, bard to attain and of sweet-accents ! Had 

1 not been overpowered by this season of spring with 
blossoming trees, I would have been able to put up with 
the present amorous infliction. The objects which appeared 
beautiful unto me while in the company of Sita, now seem 
shorn of all grace in her separation. My eyes pant for 
beholding those lotus-petals, O Lakshmana, because of their 
resemblance with Sit&'s eyes. Issuing out of the trees and 
touching the filaments, the pleasant wind is blowing like unto 
Sit&’s breath. Behold O Lakshmana, the flowery branches 
of the Karnikaras on the summits of the mountain situated 




694 



rAmZfana. 



on the southern bank of Pamp&. This prince of mountains, 
beautified with various metals, hath been throwing up 
dusts of diverse colors driven by the wind. O Saumitri, 
these mountainous expanses are burning in beauty with blos- 
soming and beautiful Kinsukas void of leaves. These fragrant 
MalatiSy Mallikas , Karavis and lotuses, growing on the 
banks of Pampa, and fostered by Pamp&'s water, and Ketakis , 
Sindhubarasy B as ant is, Matulingas y Pumas , Kunda groves, 
Chiribilyas y MadukaSy Banjulas t Vakulds , Champ akas , 
Tilakasy Nagas f PadmyakaSy blue Asokas t Ankolas, Kurantas , 
CliumakaSy Paribhadrakas , and yellow Lodhras on the 
hills like unto manes of a lion, are in flowers. There 
appear beautifully on the hills, blossoming Chutas , Pat alas, 
KobidaraSy MuchukundaSy Arjunas , Ketakas , Udda/akas, 
Sir is as, Singsapas } DhabaSy Salmalis, Kingsukas , Raktas 
KtiravaSy TinisaSy NaktamalaSy sandal trees, Syandanas, H in - 
talasy Tilakas and Nagas. Behold, O Saumitri, many 
a beautiful and blossoming tree growing on the banks of 
Pampa and gnarled by creepers having flowery tips. Like 
unto inebriate damsels, these creepers are embracing the 
trees, hard by, having their branches tossed by the wind. 
The breeze, delighted with various tastes is passing from 
tree to tree, mountain to mountain and forest to forest. 
Some fragrant trees, covered with flowers and some with 
buds, appear beautifully green. Saying, ‘£bis is sweet’, ‘this is 
pleasant’ and ‘this is full-blown/ the attached bees are falling 
to the trees. And rising again they are approaching the 
other trees growing on the banks of Pamp&. This forest- 
land, strewn with flowers dropping spontaneously from 
the trees like unto a bed sheet, hath become pleasant. O 
Saumitri, the mountainous levels variegated with flowers, are 
appearing like unto beds. Behold O Saumitri, the origins* 
tion of flowers in the trees at the expiry of the winter. The 
trees as if vieing with each other, have blossomed in this 
season of flowers. The trees, O Lakshmana, with bees 




kishkindhAkAnda Jlf. 



695 



humming around and with flowery branches are as if wel- 
coming each other. This swan, hath been sporting with its 
mate in the lucid water of Pampa exciting my amour. Truly 
does this lake like unto Mandakini itself, deserve the accom- 
plishments that are known all over the world. O best of 
Raghus, 1 do not desire Ayodhya or the dignity of Indra if 
that chaste SitS be found here and if I can live with her. I shall 
renounce all desires and thoughts if I can sport with her in 
this picturesque and green forest-land. These trees, clothed 
in diverse flowery attires, have been exciting my thought 
in this forest, who have been deprived of my dear one. O 
Saumitri, behold this Pamp& of cool water, enveloped on all 
sides with lotuses, and frequented by Chakrabakas, Karan - 
davas , Chraunchas, Plabas and high deer. Its beauty hath 
been further enhanced by the birds caroling. Diverse delight- 
ed birds have been exciting my passion, reminding me of 
my dear spouse, of blameless countenance, having a moon- 
like face and eyes resembling lotus-petals. Behold on the 
yonder mountainous expanse of various colors, stags sport- 
ing with hinds and myself on the other hand forsaken by 
Vaidehi having eyes resembling those of an antelope. These 
deer ranging hither and thither have been distressing my 
soul. It is then only that I shall attain to mental quietitude 
if I can behold Sit& on this charming mountainous expanse 
filled with birds and deer. It is then that I shall draw my 
vital breath, O Saumitri, if Vaidehi, of slender waist, with me, 
enjoyeth the fine breeze of Pampa dispersing the fragrance 
of lotuses and Saugandhtkas and ever assuaging grief. 
Blessed are they, O Lakshraana who enjoy this wild breeze of 
PampS. How hath that exquisitely fine daughter of Janaka, 
my beloved spouse, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, 
brought under the control of another person, been living 
forsaken by me ? What shall I speak unto that virtuous, 
truthful king Janaka when he shall interrogate me about 
Sit&’s welfare in an assembly ? Where is that Sita now 




6 9 6 



RlMlrANA . 



who followed me in the track of virtue, who am unfortu- 
nate and have been exiled unto woods by my Sire ? How 
shall I keep up (my being) being poorly, O Lakshmana, being 
forsaken by that Sita who followed me, deprived of king- 
dom and sense ? My heart is sinking not beholding her 
fine spotless countenance, having eyes resembling lotuses 
and smelling sweet. When shall I hear again O Laksh- 
in an a, the sweet incomparable and auspicious accents of 
Vaidehi, intervened by smiles and couched in an elegant 
and easy style ? That chaste and exquisitely fine damsel 
even when afflicted in the woods used to welcome me 
under the influence of Cupid as if she were delighted 
and had her sorrows removed. O son of a king, what 
shall I speak unto Kau 9 alya in Ayodhya when she will 
ask me of her high-souled daughter-in-law’s welfare and 
whereabouts ? Do thou proceed, O Lakshmana, and join 
Bharata gifted with fraternal affection. I am incapable 
of living any more without that daughter of Janaka.” 
Thereupon Lakshmana addressed unto the high-souled R&ma 
who was thus bewailing like one helpless with the 
following pregnant and immutable words. “Forsake thy 
grief, O Rama. May good betide thee. Do not grieve O best 
of men. Even the sinless persons lose their seuse when they 
are afflicted with grief. Remembering the grief consequent on 
separation do thou forsake thy attachment unto thy dear one. 
Out of an excess of oil even the wick burneth itself. O wor- 
shipful one, even if he hideth himself in the region under the 
earth or in a darker quarter, Ravana shall not be able to draw 
his breath. Do thou procure information about that vicious* 
souled RSkshasa ; either he shall give up Sitl or meet with 
destruction. Unless he ghes back SitS, forsooth I shall kill him 
even if he enters with her into Diti’s womb. Do thou, console 
thyself and renounce thy poorliness of mind, O worshipful 
one. Without sufficient endeavours even men of energy do 
not regain their lost ends. O worshipful one mighty is the 




KISHKlNDHlKlNDA M. 



*9 7 



course of energy. And than this there is no greater power 
on earth. And there is nothing unattainable in this world to 
one gifted with energy. Persons endowed with zeal do never 
wear away in their actions. And resorting to this energy 
only that we shall regain Janaki. Do thou not percieve that 
thou art high-souled and highly educated ? And leaving 
behind grief do thou forsake thy amorous madness.” Being 
thus accosted by Lakshmana, Rama having his mind stricken 
with sorrow, attained to mental quietitude renouncing 
grief and dolour. Thereupon Rama, of unimaginable prowess, 
passed slowly by the pleasant and charming Pampa with 
banks girt with trees shaken by the wind. 

Thereupon the high-souled Rama, stricken with grief 
passed along beholding the forest-land, fountains, caves 
and revolving aside (the pregnant words of Lakshmana). 
And the high-souled Lakshmana, of unagitated mind, : ntent 
upon R§ma's welfare and wending like unto an infuriated 
elephant, cheered him up by means of moral and heroic 
counsels. Beholding their countenances passing strange, that 
mighty chief, of monkeys, while ranging near the mount 
Rishyamuka, became highly terrified and motionless. Obser- 
ving them range there, that high-souled monkey, wending 
slowly like unto an elephant and stricken with fear and 
grief, became exceedingly sorry. Espying the highly power- 
ful Rama and Lakshmana there, monkeys, terrified, entered 
into that holy and pleasant asylum, a worthy refuge and 
having its inside always frequented by them. 




698 



RAMA YANA. 



SECTION II. 



Beholding those two high-souled brothers R9ma and 
Lakshmana, heroic and with great scimitars in their hands, 
Sugriva became terrified. That best of monkeys, of a distur- 
bed mind, cast his looks around and could not stand 
(patiently) at any place. Beholding those two of great prowess 
he could not make up his mind to remain there and the heart 
of that terrified monkey, sank. Pondering over what 
is more and what is less important the virtuous-souled 
Sugriva became highly anxious along with that monkey-herd. 
Beholding Rama and Lakshmana, Sugriva, the king of 
monkeys, greatly exercised with anxiety spake unto his 
counsellors, saying — “Forsooth, these two heroes, in false 
guises and wearing bark, despatched by Vali, have come here 
traversing the forest stronghold. ,, Beholding these two 
mighty archers the counsellors of Sugriva, quitting that 
mountainous expanse proceeded to another best of hills. 
Thereupon proceeding quickly the commanders of various 
monkey herds stood encircling the king of monkeys and the 
chief of leaders. The monkeys thus sharing in the misery and 
happiness (of their chief) proceeded jumping from hill to hill 
shaking the summits thereof, with the velocity (of their per- 
sons). Thereupon those mighty monkeys, jumping.broke down 
the flowery trees of that stronghold. Those best of monkeys, 
springing all around that mighty hill, proceeded terrifying 
the deer, the wild cats and the tigers. Stationed on that 
best of mountains the ministers of Sugriva, coming in the 
front of that monkey-chief, stood with clasped palms. There- 
upon Hanumin, skilled in speech,spake unto Sugriva, terrified 
and afraid of Vali’s wicked wiles, saying: — “Let all the 
monkeys renounce Vali’s fear ; in this best of mountains* 
Malaya — there is no fear of him. I do not behold, O best of 




KISHK INDHXKKND a M. 699 

monkeys, that wicked Vali of terrible looks, afraid of whom 
thoii'hast fled away and for whom thou art anxious. I do not 
observe here, O gentle one, the wicked-souled Vali, thy elder 
brother of impious actions and whom thou dost fear and 
I do not percieve any terror proceeding from him. O monkey- 
chief, truly manifest is thy monkey-hood and it is through 
thy light-heartedness that thou art incapable of fixing thy 
soul. Gifted with intellect and knowledge do thou perform 
all by means of gestures. A king void of sense cannot 
govern all creatures.” Hearing those pregnant tvords of 
Hanum&n,Sugriva said in better accents — “Who is not terified 
beholding those two mighty armed heroes, having expansive 
eyes, with bows, arrow, and daggers in their hands like unto 
two sons of a celestial ? Methinks these two best of men 
have been despatched by Vali. Kings have many friends. 
And it is not proper for me to place confidence in them. 
People should know that enemies, always treacherous by 
nature, range under false guises. And those foes, availing 
of their credulity, bring about their destruction whenever 
opportunity presents itself. Vali is eminently expert in 
despatching business. Monarchs, cognizant of many a wily 
expedient, bring about others* destruction. It is proper to 
discern them by means of disguised spies. O monkey, do 
thou proceed under a false guise and come by their intentions, 
examining them aright by their countenances, gestures and 
words. Do thou ascertain their intention. If dost thou find them 
delighted, secure their confidence in my favour, by eulogizing 
me again and again and giving out unto them my views. O 
best of monkeys, do thou ask them why they have entered this 
forest, if thou dost perceive that these two archers are pure- 
souled. Do thou determine the fairness and unfairness of 
their purpose by means of their gestures and conversation.” 
Being commanded by that chief of monkeys, the son of 
Maruta purposed to approach Rama and Lakshmana. Assen- 
ting to the* words of the terrified and unconquerable Sugriva 




• 7 °° 



RAAlXY ANA % 



and saying ‘Be it so/ Hanum&n, the high-souled monkey 
proceeded where the heroic RSma was with Lakshmana. 



SECTION III. 



Understanding the words of the high-souled Sugriva, 
Hanuman, proceeded, springing, from the mount Rishyamuka, 
towards the descendants of Raghu. Thereupon reuouncing 
his monkey shape, the son of Maruta, not confidihg in them, 
assumed the semblance of a mendicant. Approaching them 
humbly, HanumSn paid obeisance unto them. And he eulo- 
gized them truly in words, sweet and pleasant. Greeting 
duly those two heroes, having truth for their prowess, that 
best of monkeys addressed them in sweet accents in conso- 
nance with Sugriva's instructions. “Ye are ascetics of 
celebrated austerities, resembling the RSjarshis and celestials 
and best of Brahmacharis, why have ye come here causing 
fear unto these deer and other wild animals of the forest? 
Surveying around the trees grown on the banks of Pampi, 
ye have enhanced the beauty of this lake of auspicious water. 
Who are ye two youthful figures of mighty arms, wearing 
bark, patient, sighing and troubling these wild animals t 
Heroic, of leonine looks, gifted with mighty strength and 
prowess, slayers of foes, and holding a bow like unto that of 
Sakra ; graceful, of a pleasant countenance, of prowess like 
unto a mighty bull, having hands resembling the trunks of 
elephants, effulgent, great among men, youthful, beautifying 
this chief of mountains with the effulgence of your person^ 
worthy of having kingdoms, and like unto celestials, why 
have ye come here? Having eyes resembling lotus-petals, 
heroic, wearing matted locks, resembling each other, have ye 
come here from the celestial region ? Verily the Sun and 
the Moon have come down to the earth of their own accord. 




KISHKINDHl KIND A M. 



701 • 



Of spacious breast, heroic, having leonine shoulders, gifted 
with high energy, stout like unto plump bulls and human 
albeit looking like celestials, why are not your long, round 
arms, resembling Paridhas and deserving all ornaments 
adorned ? Methinks ye two are perfectly able to protect 
this entire earth, filled with forests and oceans, and intersected 
by the mountains Vindhya and Meru. These thy painted 
and smooth bows appear like unto the thunder-bolts of Indra 
adorned with gold. And these beautiful quivers are filled to 
the brim with sharpened and deadly shafts like unto flaming 
fire and serpents. And these two daggers, of mighty propor- 
tions, furnished with burning gold, appear like unto serpents.let 
loose. Why do ye not answer me accosting you thus ? A 
certain heroic and virtuous monkey-chief, by name Sugriva, 
hath been journeying on this earth, distressed at heart, being 
driven away by his brother. I have come here being des- 
patched by that high-souled Sugriva — my name is Hanuman, 
the foremost of monkeys. That virtuous -souled Sugriva 
desires to make friends with you. And know me to be his 
counsellor — a monkey, the son of Pavana y ranging every 
where at my will, coming here, under the guise of a mendicant, 
from the mount Rishymuka, for the welfare of Sugriva." 
Having addressed thus those two heroes — Rama and 
Lakshmana, Hanuman, conversant with words and skilled in 
speech, did not speak again. Hearing those words, the 
effulgent R&ma, with a delighted countenance, spake unto his 
younger brother, Lakshmana — sitting by him. “He is the 
counsellor of the high-souled Sugriva, the lord of monkeys and 
hath approached me, soliciting my friendship in his (Sugriva’s) 
favour. Do thou welcome, with pleasant words, O Saumitri, 
this monkey — Sugriva’s minister, the subduer of foes, affec- 
tionate and skilled in speech. None can speak thus who 
hath not mastered the Rtg-veda , borne well the Yajur-veda 
and acquainted himself thoroughly with the Skyam-veda, 
Forsooth he hath studied well all the Grammars, for he hath 




70J 



RAmAiaNA. 



not used a single inelegant word though he hath addressed 
me with a number of them. And no defect was perceived on 
his countenance, eyes, forehead, brows or on any of hi9 limbs. 
II is words, — few, beyond all suspicion, pleasant, and uttered 
in a mil l tone, — came out readily of his throat and breast. He 
has uttered accents, wonderful, ready, accomplished, auspici- 
ous and captivating. Whose heart is not moved by these 
wonderful words, proceeding from Jieart, throat and brain) ? 
Even an enemy, who hath his sword uplifted, (is moved). 0 
sinless one, how doth that monarch accomplish his objects 
who hath not got such a messenger ? Indeed whose emis- 
saries are so accomplished, all his missions are fulfilled only 
by virtue of their words.” Thus addressed, Saumitri, skilled 
in speech, welcomed that monkey — Sugriva*s counsellor and 
son of Havana. ‘O learned one! We knew well the 
accomplishments of the high-souled Sugriva. We shall 
find out that king of monkey herds. O Hanum&n, O best of 
monkeys, we shall go by whatever thou shalt say, under the 
instructions of Sugriva.” Hearing these skillful words, that 
son of Pavana, delighted, revolving within him the means for 
Sugriva* s conquest, purposed to bring about a friendly union 
between them. 



SECTION IV. 



Hearing those words (of R5ma) and learning his amica- 
ble feeling (in relation to Sugriva' as also, seeing that R&ma 
was willing to assist Sugriva. llanumSn, getting exceedingly 
delighted, remembered Sugriva. '*Since this one of successful 
acts hath been come by and also this business is in hand, 
the high-souled Sugriva will most probably obtain the 
monarchy.” Then transported with joy, that foremost of 
monkeys, Hanuman, in these words, replied unto RSma, deft 




kishkindiiAka nda m. 



703 



in speech, saying, “Why is it, that accompanied with thy 
younger brother, hast thou come to this dense and trackless 
forest, garnished with the wood-lands of Pampa, and filled 
with various kinds of ferocious beasts ?*' Hearing those words 
of his, Lakshmana, directed by Rama, informed (Hanun.an) 
of all about Rama, the son of Dayaratha. “There was a 
king named Dasaratha. Possessed of effulgence, and attached 
unto righteousness, he, in consonance with his proper duties, 
for aye, governed the four orders. He hath no hater ; nor 
doth he hate any one. And in relation to all creatures he 
was like another great-father. And he celebrated Agnislitoma 
and other sacrifices with presents (to Brahmanas). This one 
is his eldest son, named Rama, famous among men. He is 
the refuge of all creatures, and competent to carry out the 
injunctions of his father. The eldest son of Dayaratha, 
he is foremost of all his sons in merit. He bears marks of 
royalty, and hath the prosperity of a kingdom. Deprived 
of his kingdom, in company with myself, he hath come 
hither with the view of dwelling in this wood. And, O 
highly exalted one, this one of subdued senses is followed 
by his wife Sita even as at the decline of day the exceedingly 
effulgent Sun is followed by (his spouse) Splendour. I am 
the younger brother of this one endeued with gratitude and 
of various lore. Subdued by his virtues, I, Lakshmana by 
name, have dedicated myself to his service. Worthy of 
happiness, homage, and intent upon the welfare of all beings, 
deprived of wealth and living in the forest, he hath his wile 
carried off by a Rakshasa,wearing shapes at will. Nor have 
we yet (been able) to ascertain who is that Rakshasa that hath 
carried off his wife. A son of Diti named Danu, had, by virtue 
of an imprecation, undergone Rakshasa-hood. He it is 
who had related unto us all about the capable Sugriva. — 
“That exceedingly puissant one shall have a knowledge of 
the ravisher of thy wile Y’ Having said this, Danu beaming 
(with a halo) went to heaven. Thus have I related unto thee 




704 



RlMlYANA . 



all as it fell out. Both Rama and myself have saught the 
shelter of Sugriva. Having given away profuse wealth and 
attained high fame, this one who formerly was the lord of 
the worlds, now wishes to make Sugriva his master. That 
one attached unto virtue, that refuge (of all) — the son of 
that shelter (of all beings) hath come under the protection of 
Sugriva. That spiritual guide, who ere now was worthy 
of being the shelter (of all) and win) (actually) was the refuge 
(of all creatures) — Raghava, hath saught the shelter of 
Sugriva. That Rama in whose happiness and favor the 
subjects found their felicity, seeketh the good graces of 
Sugriva. Famed over the three worlds, the eldest son of 
that monarch who had always and for aye honored all the 
kings of the earth crowned with every virtue, — viz. R&ma, 
hath sought the protection of Sugriva, lord of monkeys. On 
Rama being overwhelmed with sorrow, tried by grief, and 
having come under his refuge, it behoveth Sugriva along 
with the leaders of bands to show favor unto R&ma P When 
Sumitra’s son shedding tears had spoken thus, that one 
skilled in speech, HanumSn, answered in these words, 
‘Persons of such a stamp, endeued with understanding, of 
controlled anger and subdued senses, should be seen by the 
master of monkeys ; and such come within one’s ken through 
blessed luck. He also hath been driven out of his kingdom, 
and hath incurred the hostility of VSli. And his wife torn 
away from him, he dwelleth in this wood, in fear, having been 
exceedingly harassed by his brother. That son of the Sun, 
Sugriva, along with us, will help thee in seeking out Sitl.' 
Having said these sweet and hurried words, Hanum&n said 
unto Raghava, ‘I will (now) repair unto Sugriva. 1 When 
Hanuman had said this, the righteous Lakshmana duly paying 
homage unto the former, addressed R&ghava, saying, ‘From 
the glad way in which this son of the god of the wind is speak- 
ing, it appears that he also seeks thy service ; and, arriving 
(at this region) thou also, Raghava, bast reaped success. He 




KlSHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



705 



speaketh openly with a delightful light in his countenance ; 
and cheerfulness. (It seems) that the heroic Hanumcm, son 
unto the God of wind doth not speak anything that is false.* 
Then that vastly wise one Hanuman the son of the wind god 
departed, taking with him the heroic descendants of Raghu, 
for (presenting them) unto the monarch of monkeys. 
Renouncing the guise of a beggar, and assuming the form 
of a monkey, that foremost of monkeys went away, placing 
those heroes on his back. And then the heroic monkey, 
the son of the wind-god, of wide fame, and great prowess, 
with his mind perfectly pure, considering himself as crowned 
with success, and experiencing exceeding delight, arrived 
at that best of mountains in company with Rama and 
Lakshmana. 



SECTION V. 



H aving departed from Rishyamuka, and arrived at the 
Malaya hill, Hanumin informed the king of monkeys of 
(the arrival of) the descendants of Raghu. “O exceedingly 
wise one, this one that hath come here is Rama having 
truth for his prowess. This is Rama having truth for his 
prowess, in company with his brother, Lakshmana. Rama 
the son of Dagaratha, is born in the race of the Ikshwakus. 
Ever doing the will of his sire, he has been sent hither, in 
order that his father’s verity may stand in tact. R&ma, who 
hath come to the forest, is the son of him who hath propitia- 
ted Fire with Rajasuyas and horse sacrifices, — dispensing 
Dakshinas and kine by hundreds and thousands — and who 
hath governed the earth by asceticism and truthful speech. 
His son Rama hath come to the forest through a woman. 
While that high-souled one having his senses under control 
was dwelling in the woods, his wife was carried off by 
89 




706 



rAmAfanj. 



Ravana ; and he (Rama) hath (in consequence) sought thy 
protection. Do thou, granting an interview unto the brothers 
Rama and Lakshmana — both of them worthy of homage — 
who are eager for thy friendship, receive them respectfully.” 
Hearing HanumSn’s words, Sugriva— lord of monkeys, 
becoming visible (at his will), gladly spake unto Rdghava, 
“sir, you are versed in morality, and bear love towards all. 
The son of the wind-god hath faithfully described your 
virtues unto me. That you, O lord, are anxious to contract 
friendship with me who am a monkey does me honor and 
is my gain. If you relish friendship with me, do you take 
this stretched arm and my hand with yours,— and bind 
yourself fast with a vow.” Hearing these sweet words of 
Sugriva, (RSma) exceedingly delighted, pressed Sugriva’s 
hand with his. And contracting friendship with Sugriva, 
R5ma experiencing great joy embraced him waririly. Then 
that subduer of foes, HanumSn, leaving off the guise of a 
beggar, in his native shape produced a fire with two pieces 
of wood. Then worshipping that flaming fire with flowers, 
he, well pleased, carefully placed it between them (Rlma and 
Sugriva.) Then Sugriva- and R&ghava went round the fire; 
and (thus) they were fastened in friendship. And with 
delighted hearts, both of them — the monkey and Rftghava 
began to gaze at each other, yet they did not feel satiated. 
“Thou art the friend of my heart. Our happiness and misery 
are common,” — Sugriva, rejoicing greatly, said these words 
unto R£ghava. Then spreading a beautifully blossoming 
spray of S&la, full of foliage, Sugriva made an awning and sat 
down with R&ghava. HanumSn, the son of the wind-god 
with great joy gave unto Lakshmana a bough of a sandal 
tree, plentifully blossoming. Next Sugriva, feeling high 
rapture, with his eyes expanded with joy, answered 
Rama blandly in sweet words, saying, “Oppressed have I 
been, O RSma ; and here am always afflicted with fear. 
Deprived of my wife, I have, agitated with apprehension. 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M 



707 



sought refuge in this dense wilderness. I am afflicted with 
fright, and worried by fear, with my senses bewildered in 
this wood. Wronged have I been by Vali, my brother; and I 
have incurred his hostility, O Raghava. And, O exalted one, 
do thou dispell the fear of me, who am tormented with 
fear on account of Vali. And, O Kakutstha, it behoves thee 
so to act that I may not become subject to fear.” Thus 
addressed, the powerful* Kakutstha, knowing righteousness, 
and devoted to virtue, answered Sugriva, smiling, “ O mighty 
monkey, that the outcome of amity is good offices I am well 
aware of. I will slay that captor of thy wife Vali, These 
infallible sharpened shafts of mine, resembling the sun, fea- 
thered with the plumes of the Kanka, like unto the thunder- 
bolt of the great Indra, having sharp heads and even knots, 
like infuriated serpents, — being let go with vehemence, 
shall alight upon the impious Vali. Do thou today behold 
Vali slain with sharpened shafts, resembling venomous 
snakes,— -like unto a tom hill lying on the ground.” Hearing 
those words of Raghava fraught with his welfare, Sugriva 
supremely rejoiced, said these words, informed with rapture, 
“Thou hero ! Thou lion among men ! by thy grace shall I 
obtain both my beloved and my monarchy. O God among 
men, do thou so deal with that foe, my elder brother, that 
he may not again wrong me.” The left eyes of Sita, the 
lord of apes, and night rangers, — respectively like the lotus, 
gold, and flaming fire, throbbed when the friendship between 
Rama and Sugriva was contracted. 




70S 



RlMXYANA. 



SECTION VI. 



^UGRIVA well pleased again addressed R9ghava, the son 
of Raghu, saying, “O Rama, this servant of thine, foremost of 
my counsellors, Hanuman, hath related (unto me), the reason 
of thy arrival in this lone forest. Thy wife, Maithili, daughter 
unto Janaka, separated from thee as well as the intelligent 
Lakshmana, and weeping (in consequence) was carried off by 
a Raksha. Seeing for opportunities of doing mischief that 
R&ksha, having slain Jatayu, hath caused unto thee the 
grief that comes of separation from one's wife. But thou 
wilt soon be relieved from the sorrow that comes of separa- 
tion from one's wife. Her will I bring like unto the ravished 
Deva£ruti. O repressor of foes, whether she be in the 
nether regions or under the sky, I will, bringing thy wife, make 
her over unto thee. O RSghava, know my words to be true. 
O mighty-armed one, like unto poison, thy wife is incapable 
of being digested even by the gods and Asuras with Indra 
(at their head). O mighty-armed one, leave off sorrow, 1 
will bring back thy beloved. From guess I find that it was 
doubtless Mithila’s daughter whom I saw when she was 
being carried away by that Riksha of terrific deeds. She 
was crying, *R§ma, Rama, Lakshmana, Lakshmana/ and in 
the lap of Ravana she looked like the wife of the Snake-chief. 
Seeing me along with my four counsellors stationed at the 
hill, she dropped down her scarf and her ornaments. All 
these, O RSghava, 1 have taken and kept (with me). I will 
bring them. It behoveth thee to recognise them." There- 
upon R§ma spoke unto the sweet-speeched Sugriva, 4 Bring 
(them), at once, my friend. Why dost thou tarry V Having 
been thus addressed, Sugriva swiftly entered a deep cavern 
in the mountain, with the view of doing what was dear unto 
RSghava. Then taking the scarf as well as the ornaments. 




KISHKINDHl Kl ADA M. 



709 

“Look at this,” (Saying this) the monkey held them before 
RSma. And taking the sheet and the ornaments, (Rama) 
had his eyes filled with tears, like the moon covered by the 
dew. And from affection for Sita, (Rama,) his eyes filled 
with tears, deprived of patience, fell down to the ground. 
And placing the elegant ornaments on his bosom, he sighed 
again and again, like an enraged serpent in a hole. And 
seeing Sumitra's son at his side, R5ma shedding ceaseless 
tears, began to lament piteously, u O Lakshmana, behold this 
scarf and these ornaments which Vaidehi, while being carried 
away, let fall from her person to the earth. Surely Sita, 
while being ravished, let these fall on a sward, for these 
remain as before.” Thus accosted, Lakshmana spoke, saying, 
“I do not know her bracelets ; I do not know her ear-rings. 
But I know full well her bangles on account of my always 
bowing down unto her feet.” Thereupon Raghava said these 
words unto Sugriva, “Tell me, O Sugriva, at what place didst 
thou see Sita, while she, dear unto me as life, was taken away 
by the fierce-looking Rakshasa ? And where doth that 
R&ksha, who hath brought on this high peril, and for whom 
I will slay all the Rakshasas, live ? He, that hath carried off 
Mithila’s daughter, and roused my wrath, hath certainly for 
his own end, opened the door of death. Tell me all about 
that ranger of the night, that deceitfully hath carried away my 
dearest wife from the forest. My foe, O lord of monkey, 
will I to-day send to the neighbourhood of Y§ma.” 



SECTION vi 1. 



Thus addressed by the aggrieved Rama, the monkey, 
Sugriva, his accents obstructed by vapour and his eyes filled 
with tears, said with joined hands, “I do not know the hidden 
abode of that exceedingly wicked RSkshasa, — nor do I know 




7io 



RlMlYANA . 



Ins heroism and prowess, or the lineage of that one sprung 
from a vicious racs. O vanquisher of foes, leave off sorrow- 
ing. I promise unto thee truly, I will exert so that thou 
mayst obtain Maithili. Slaying Ravana with his hosts, and 
putting forth my manliness capable of pleasing others, I 
will speedily act so that thou mayst be pleased. Do not be 
overwhelmed with grief : summon the fortitude that is in 
thee. Such lightness of sense doth not become persons like 
thee. I also have experienced mighty disaster arising out of 
separation from my wife ; but I do not weep in this wise,— 
nor do I forsake my fortitude. A despicable monkey as I 
am, I do not grieve for her, — and what again shall I say of 
one that is magnanimous, endued with meekness and firm- 
ness, and great ? It behoveth thee to restrain thy falling 
tears by patience. It behoveth thee not to resign that 
patience which is the dignity of persons possessed of the 
quality of goodness. Persons endued with firmness of 
understanding by help of their intellect, do not in 
calamity consequent on separation from dear ones, or on 
the occasion of loss of wealth, or of fear arising from thieves, 
wild beasts, &c., or of loss of life itself, lose their self- 
possession. He that is senseless as well as he that suffers 
himself to be overwhelmed with grief, losing all control over 
self, drown themselves in sorrow like a boat bearing a 
heavy load in water. I soothe thee from the love I bear 
towards thee. Do thou have recourse to manliness* It doth 
not behove thee to let grief overcome thee. Those that in- 
dulge in sorrow, know no happiness ; and their virtue* goeth 
out of them. Therefore it behoveth thee not to grieve. 
The life even of him that is mastered by sorrow is in jeopardy. 
Therefore, thou foremost of monarchs, leave off that grief. 
Do thou entirely have recourse to fortitude. In the spirit 
of a friend I tell what is for thy good : I do not instruct 
thee. Honor the amity I bear towards thee. It behoveth thee 



• In the sense of eneigjr.— T. 





KISHKINDHlRlNDA M. 



7it 



not to weep.” Thus sweetly consoled by Sugriva, Rlghava 
with the end of his cloth wiped his face tarnished with tears. 
And after that lord, Kakutstha, had recovered his natural state 
. through the words of Sugriva, he embraced Sugriva and 
addressed him, saying, “O Sugriva, that which, pleasing and 
profitable, proper and fit, ought to be done by a friend, hath 
* been done by thee. Solicited by thee, I have, O friend, 
regained my natural tone of mind. Such a friend is rare, 
specially at such a time. But thou shouldst strive to trace 
Maithili as well as bring about the destruction of that fierce 
R&kshasa, the impious Ravana. Do thou also without reserve 
say what I shall have to do for thee. Like corn sown in a 
fertile field in the rainy season, every concern of thine shall 
attain success. O best of monkeys, do thou verily consider 
as true the words that I have uttered through affection. 
Falsehoods have I never spoken before, nor will I ever say 
one (in future). This I promise to thee. I swear by truth 
itself.” Hearing R&ghava’s words, and in special his promise, 
Sugriva felt exceedingly delighted along with this monkey 
ministers. Thus fast bound in friendship, the man and the 
monkey conversed with each other about (topics) which each 
thought fit, connected with their joys and griefs. Hearing 
the words of that illustrious monarch of kings, that hero — 
greatest of monkeys — considered and felt in his heart as if 
his work had already been accomplished. 



SECTION VIII. 



Sugriva, rejoiced at the words of Rama, ^said unto that 
hero, the elder brother of Lakshmana, who was well pleased. 
“I am, without doubt, worthy of being favored by the gods, 
since thou accomplished and furnished with virtues art my 
friend. By thy help, O Rama, one can, O sinless one, 




712 



RlMlYANA . 



obtain the kingdom of the celestials,— what is to be said of 
one’s kingdom, O lord ? I, who have, in the presence of Fire, 
gained for my friend (thee) sprung from the R&ghava race, 
am, O Raghava worthy of being honored by my friends and 
relations. Thou also shalt by and by learn that I am a fit 
friend for thee ; but I can not speak unto thee of the qualities 
that abide in me. O free one, the felicity of high-souled and 
self-governed friends like thee abounds and is enduring. 
Pious friends look upon the silver, and gold, and the elegant 
ornaments of pious friends as common property. Whether 
rich or poor, happy or miserable, good or bad, a friend is 
the greatest refuge (of his friend). Witnessing such affection, 
people can, O sinless one, forsake wealth, comfort, and 
even their native land for the sake of their friends.” There- 
at the graceful R§ma, in front of the intelligent Lakshmana 
resembling Vasava, said unto Sugriva of a pleasing presence, 

— ‘‘It is even so.” The next day seeing R&ma as well as 
the mighty Lakshmana seated on the ground, Sugriva briskly ! 
cast his eyes about the forest. And hard by that lord of 
monkeys discovered a S&la tree, bearing a few beautiful 
blossoms, with its wealth of foliage, decked by blade bees. 
Thereat tearing off a beautiful bough full of leaves, Sugriva 
spread it (on the earth), and then sat down with RAghava. 
And seeing them seated, Hanum&n breaking off a branch of 
Sala, humbly made Lakshmana sit down. Seeing RAma seated 
at his ease in that best of mountains abounding in Sdls 
flowers, and cheerful like the ocean, Sugriva from love spoke 
unto Rama sweet and excellent words, of which the letters 
vibrated with delight. ‘‘Wronged by my brother, I deprived 
of my wife and exceedingly distressed, and exercised with 
fear, live in this foremost of mountains, Rishyamuka. And, 

O Raghava, my senses wildered, having been oppressed by 
Vali, and having incurred his enmity, I am afflicted with fear, 
and tormented with fright. O thou, that removest the fear 
of all creatures, it behoveth thee who am tormented by fear 




KISHKINDHlKlNDAM. 



713 



and am helpless, to extend thy favor unto me." Thus 
accosted, ,that ever energetic one knowing righteousness and 
devoted to it, KSLkutstha, smiling, said unto Sugriva, “Benefits 
make friends, while injuries denote enemies. Even this 
very day will I slay him that hath deprived thee of thy wife. 
O exalted one, these feathered shafts of exceeding energy, 
sprung from the KSrtikeya forest, decked with gold, furnished 
with the plumes of the Kanka, resembling the thunderbolt of 
the great Indra, having smooth knots, and sharp heads, are 
like enraged serpents. Thou shalt behold thy brother and 
enemy, who is named VSli slain by my shafts, and lying like 
a dislodged hill." Hearing Raghava's words, Sugriva — lord 
of hosts — felt excess of joy and exclaimed, “Excellent well t 
Excellent well !” “O R<ima, overwhelmed am I by grief. 
Thou art the succour of those afflicted with sorrow. Having 
made thee my friend, I express to thee my grief. I have, 
in the presence of Fire by giving thee my hand, made thee 
my friend. Thou art dearer unto me than life itself. This I 
swear unto thee by Truth. Having made thee my friend, I 
inspired with confidence am unbosoming myself to thee. 
The sorrow, that is in my heart, is constantly enfeebling 
my mind.” Having proceeded thus far, he, his eyes filled 
with tears and his words faltering because of vapour, could 
not speak aloud. And Sugriva suddenly restrained, before 
R£ma, the force of tears, like unto the tide of a river. And 
having restrained his tears and wiped his fair eyes, that 
energetic one, sighing heavily, again went on, — “Formerly, O 
Rama, I was deprived of my kingdom and reproached in 
harsh language by the strong Vali. And he also took away 
my wife dearer unto me than life ; and my friends have been 
imprisoned and been bound. That wicked wight, O Raghava, 
seeks my life. Many monkeys commissioned by him have 
been slain by me. It was, O Rlghava, in consequence of 
this fear that when I (first) saw thee, I did not come out. 
This is all the fear that oppresses me. My adherents are 




714 



RAMlYANA. 



only these headed by Hanum&n. It is for this that al- 
though reduced to the greatest straits I have been able to 
preserve my life. These affectionate apes protect me on all 
sides. They go when I go, and stay when I stay. Why 
should I expatiate ? In brief, V&li my eldeF brother, famed 
for his prowess, is my foe. Even by his death my present 
pain would be removed. Both my life' and my happiness 
are bound up with his death. I have, O Rftma, communi- 
cated unto thee, the way in which my grief might be 
removed. Whether in joy or in sorrow, a friend is the 
refuge of his friend . 11 Hearing these words, RAma said unto 
Sugriva, “What for arose hostility between thyself and VUi? 
I wish to hear this (related) faithfully. Having learnt the 
cause of your hostility, and ascertained your strength and 
weakness, I will, O monkey, understanding the irritation 
that hath ensued, compass thy happiness. Great is my 
wrath, on hearing thee disgraced ; and like a downpour in the 
rainy season my ire increases, shaking my very heart* Do 
thou cheerfully and confidingly speak while I fix the string 
to my bow. As soon as my shaft is off, thy foe is beaten.” 
Thus addressed by the high-souled K&kutstha, Sugriva, along 
with the four (other) monkeys, experienced exceeding delight 
Then with a cheerful countenance, Sugriva began to unfold 
unto Lakshmana’s elder brother the cause of tbeir hostility* 



SECTION IX. 



66 ' 



•My elder brother named Vili— destroyer of foe% was 
formerly highly honored both by my father and myself. At 
the death of our father, the counsellors, saying,— ‘This is the 
eldest son’, made him, who was well loved (of all), lord of At 
monkeys in the kingdom. While he was p w t rni ii, 
kingdom which had belonged to his father and 




KISHKlNDHlKlNDA M. 715 

I, at all times, in humiliation, remained like a servant. There 
was one endued with energy, named MSyavi. He was the 
eldest son of Dunduvi. Formerly there alrose a mighty 
hostility between himself and Vali. And it came to pass 
that one night when all had fallen asleep, (May&vi) coming 
to Kishkindha, began to emit roars in great wrath, and 
challenged Vili to an encounter. My brother, who was fast 
asleep, bearing those dreadful yells, could not bear them ; 
but at once rushed out vehemently. And as he rushed out in 
wrath, for the purpose of slaying that foremost of Asuras, he 
was opposed by his wives as well as myself, who humbled 
himself before him. But moving them aside, that exceeding- 
ly powerful one sallied out. Thereupon out of affection I 
also went out with Vali. And seeing my brorher and me 
present from a distance, the Asura, seized with a panic, 
fled with speed. And as he was rushing on in fear and when 
we had proceeded further, the moon arising, discovered the 
way. And the Asura, coming by a capacious and impregnable 
hole covered with grass (on the surface), entered it amain ; 
and we remained there. Seeing his enemy enter the hole, 
van, overcome by anger, and with his senses agitated, spoke 
unto me, saying, “Do thou, O Sugriva, carefully stay at the 
mouth of the hole, while I entering in, slay my foe in battle. ,, 
Hearing his speech, that subduer of foes was besought by 
me (for permission to enter the cave along* with him). But 
making me swear by touching his feet he entered the 
cave. And after he had entered the cave, and as I re- 
mained at its mouth, a space of over a complete year 
rolled away. And seized with sorrow (I reflected), ‘As 
I do not see my brother, he must be lost’ — and my mind 
was alarmed, apprehending his death. After a long time, 
I saw frothy blood issuing from the cave. Thereat I was 
greatly aggrieved. And roars of Asuras also reached 
my ears ; but I could not hear the cries of my superior, en- 
gaged in conflict. And from these signs concluding my 




RlMlFANA. 



716 

brother to be slain, I, closing the mouth of the cavern with 
a crag, huge as a hill, and afflicted with grief, after perform- 
ing his watery rites, came (back) to KishkindhS, O my friend. 
And although I carefully concealed (the matter), the coun- 
sellers heard it all. There they, assembled together, installed 
me (in the kingdom). And, as I was ruling the kingdom 
with justice, it came to pass that after having slain his foe, 
the D&nava, that monkey (VSli) came to Kishkindha. Then 
seeing me installed, he, with his eyes reddened in wrath, 
slaying my counsellors, spoke harsh words to me. And 
although I was capable of chastising him, yet my mind 
influenced by a sense of my brother’s dignity, did not incline 
towards that sin. Having slain his foe, he then entered his 
city ; and I, honoring that high-souled one, duly saluted him. 
He withal did not with a glad heart utter his benediction. 
And, O lord, I, bowing, touched his feet with my crown $ yet 
from anger V31i did not extend to me his grace.” 



SECTION X. 



X HEN wishing for my welfare I strove to propitiate 
my angry brother, wrought up with wrath, who was seated 
(there). By gootfMuck it is that thou hast come off safely; 
and that thou hast slain the foe. O thou that rejoicest the 
forlorn, thou art the only protector of me who am helpless. 
I hold this umbrella furnished with many ribs, resembling 
the moon risen ; as well as this chowri containing hair,— do 
thou accept my service. O king, suffering greatly, I remained 
for a whole year at the mouth of the cave. And seeing blood 
issuing from the cave, I had my heart agitated with grief 
and my senses extremely overwhelmed. Then closing up 
the mouth of the cavern with a mountain summit, and 
returning from that place, I again came back to Kishkindha. 




KISHKINDHlKA NDA M. 



717 



Seeing me enter in a dejected mood, the citizens and coun- 
sellors installed me, but it was not done with my will. There- 
fore it behoves thee to forgive me. Thou art the king, O 
worthy of honor ; and I am, as before, ever (thy servant). I 
was entrusted with regal power in consequence of thy 
absence. This kingdom consisting of courtiers and citizens, 
remains now rid of its thorns. It was established in me as a 
trust. And I protected it as ‘such. Do not get wroth, O mild 
one, O destroyer of foes. I beseech thee with bent head, 
and, O king, with joined hands. With the view of preventing 
any one to wish to conquer this kingdom vacant (of its 
ruler), the citizens and counsellors unanimously, by force, 
entrusted me with regal authority.” As I said this softly, the 
monkey reproaching me, said unto me ‘Fie on thee/ and 
censured me greatly. And bringing together the subjects 
and favorite counsellors, spoke unto me, before friends, highly 
improper words. ‘Ye know that formerly one night the 
mighty Asura MaySLvi, getting enraged, challenged me (to a 
fight) desirous of an encounter with me. Hearing his speech 
I sallied out of the palace, and was followed by this horrible 
brother of mine. Thereat seeing me with one to assist me, 
and finding that we had come upon him, that mighty Asura, 
fled, seized with fear. And fleeing on, he (at length) swiftly 
entered a huge hole. Knowing that he had entered that 
dreadful and large cave, I spoke unto my brother of a crooked 
presence,— Without slaying (this Asura) I cannot return to 
the palace. Do thou wait at the mouth of the cave while I 
slay him. This one is stationed here — thinking thus, I 
entered that inaccessible cave. And as I searched (for the 
Asura), one entire year passed away. And that wicked 
wight who had roused my alarm in consequence of his dis- 
appearance, was (at length) slain by me in one day, along 
with his friends. Then as he emitted yells in the subterrane- 
an region, the cave was filled with his blood and it became 
difficult to come out of it. Having with ease slain my 




71 8 



RlMlYANA. 



powerful foe, I could not find the outlet of the cavern, its 
mouth having been closed. Then as I again and again cried 
“Sugriva, Sugriva,” I became exceedingly sorry for not 
receiving any reply. Thereat I threw down the stone after 
striking it many times with my legs. Then coming out by 
its mouth, I have come to this city. Seeking my kingdom, 
the crafty Sugriva had shut me up there, forgetting fraternal 
love. 1 Saying this, that monkey, the’ shameless Vlili, exiled 
me with a single cloth on. O R&ghava, I have been dis- 
comfitted by him, and been deprived of my wife. And from 
fear of him, I have wandered over the whole earth having 
forest and seas. And aggrieved in consequence of my having 
been deprived of my wife, I have (at length) entered this 
best of mountains, Rishyamuka, which for a certain reason* 
is incapable of being approached by Vali. Thus have I 
mentioned unto thee the great cause of this hostility, O 
Raghava, innocent as. I am, I have come by this mighty 
misfortune. O thou that inspirest the fear of all creatures, 
by chastising Vali it behoveth thee to grant thy grace unto 
me, who am tormented with fear in connection with Vali, 
O hero.” Thus accosted, that energetic one knowing righte- 
ousness, smiling, began to address Sugriva in words fraught 
with morality. These sharpened shafts of mine, resembling 
the sun, and never missing, shall furiously fall upon the 
wicked Vali. So long as thou dost not see that stealer of 
thy wife, so long only shall the impious Vali of vile character, 
live. By what I myself feel, I see that thou hast sunk in a 
sea of sorrow. But I will deliver thee'; and thou shalt attain 
both thy wife as well as this kingdom. Hearing that speech 
of his, capable of enhancing joy and manliness, Sugriva 
overjoyed, spoke those words informed with high sense. 



* In consequence of Matanga’s curse. — T. 





KISHKINDHlKlNDAM. 



719 



SECTION xi. 



K earing R&tna’s words capable of enhancing joy and 
manliness, Sugriva highly honored the former and extolled 
him, saying, “Enraged, thou, with thy sharp and flaming 
shafts, capable of piercing into the vitals, canst burn up the 
worlds, like the sun at the universal dissolution. Heedfully 
hearing from me of Vali’s strength, prowess and fortitude, 
do thou afterwards, ascertain what is fit. Before the sun 
rises, Vili cau easily range the ocean from west to east and 
from south to north. Ascending the tops of mountains, Vali 
possessed of prowess throws up their summits, and then 
again swiftly holds them. And displaying his strength, V§li 
"vehemently crushes in the woods various stout trees. There 
•was one assuming the shape of buffaloe named Dunduvi, 
resembling in splendour the summit of Kaila^a. That one 
possessed of prowess had the strength of an hundred elephants. 
That wicked one of a gigantic body inflated by his prowess 
and blinded by the boon he had received once went to that 
lord of streams — the Sea. Passing beyond the Sea, with 
waves upon him, — and containing heaps of gems, he said unto 
the mighty deep— “Grant me battle.” Thereat the righteous- 
souled and mighty Ocean arose and, O king, said these words 
unto that Asura, who had been urged by Death. O thou 
that art skilled in fight, I am not competent to offer thee 
fight ; but listen to me who will tell thee who shall offer the 
fight. There is a monarch of mountains in a mighty forest, 
—the great refuge of asceticism, the worker of the weal 
(of all), an Asura, celebrated by the name of Himav&n con- 
taining great cascades and furnished with many fountains 
and caves. He can compass thy incomparable pleasure. 
Concluding that the ocean was afraid, that foremost of 
Asuras, presented himself in the wood of Himav&n, like a 




720 



rAmAyana. 



shaft shot from a bow. Thereupon Dundhuvi began to throw 
down many white crags resembling the foremost of elephants; 
and sent up shouts. Then resembling white clouds, mild and 
possessed of a pleasing shape, Himavgn, stationed on the 
summit, spoke, “O Dundhuvi, O thou that art attached to right- 
eousness, it behoveth thee not to distress me. I am the 
refuge of all those ascetics who are not expert in military 
arts. 17 Hearing those words of that intelligent lord of mountains 
Dundhuvi, with reddened eyes, said 14 Afraid of me and 

hence void of energy if thou art incapable of fighting with 
me, do thou name him who is ready to fight with me who am 
desirous of entering into conflict.” Hearing these words 
the virtuous-souled HimavSn, skilled in speech, spoke unto 
that great Asura, exercised with ire. 4f O greatly wise one, 
there lives in Kishkindha, of incomparable beauty, the mighty 
and highly graceful monkey — the son of Sakra, by name 
Vali. That mighty wise one, skilled in warfare, is capable 
of fighting with thee on equal terms like unto Naiquchi with 
Vasava. Do thou speedily repair unto him if dost thou wish 
for a conflict. He is always expert in military exploits and 
is hard to repress.” Hearing Him&van’s words, Dundhuvi, 
inflamed with ire, went to Kishkindhh — Vali’s . capital. 
Assuming the figure of a terrible buffaloe, .with sharpened 
horns like unto a cloud big with water, ranging on the sky 
in the rainy season, and approaching the gate of Kishkindhl 
that highly powerful one set up a terrible roar, shaking 
the earth like unto the sound of a kettle-drum. Like unto 
an elephant he felled, out of haughtiness, the trees around, 
and rent the earth with his hoofs scraping it with his 
horns. Vali was in the female-apartment at that time, and 
unable to bear the sound came out with his wives like unto 
the Moon with stars. Thereupon that lord of monkeys and 
other wild animals, spoke openly unto Dundhuvi, sayings 
“O Dundhuvi, obstructing this my city-gate, why dost thou 
set up a terrible roar ? Dost thou know my mightv str e n gth f 




KISHKINDHAkINDA M. 721 

Do thou save thy own life.” Hearing those words of that 
intelligent lord of monkeys, Dundhuvi, with reddened eyes 
spoke : — ' tf O hero, it becometh thee not to speak thus before 
thy wives. Do thou enter into conflict with me and thy prowess 
shall be ascertained thereafter. Or I shall suppress my 
wrath for this night and do thou, O monkey, enjoy till the 
rise of the Sun. Embracing all the monkeys, inviting all thy 
friends, do thou, that art the lord of the monkey herds, 
honor them with gifts. Do thou survey Kiskindha and make 
thy children kings. And do thou enjoy with thy wives — it 
is me that shall crush down thy pride. He, who destroyeth 
a person who is given up to drinking, reckless, emaciated and 
deprived of weapons, and one like thee, sunk in the abyss 
of voluptuousness, committeth the sin consequent upon the 
destruction of an embryo,” Whereto replied Vali, laughing, 
unto that wicked lord of Asuras, leaving aside all his 
wives, headed by Tara. “If thou art not afraid of fighting, 
do not consider me as one given up to drinking only. 
Do thou regard this my attachment as a draught in this 
conflict, to be drunk by the heroes.” Saying this, Vali, 
taking his golden garland, conferred on him by his father 
Mahendra, addressed himself for the conflict. Holding him 
by the horns, Vali, that lord of monkeys, setting up a 
terrible roar, hurled Dundhuvi resembling a mountain. 
And bellowing a thundering voice, Vali crushed (him) down. 
And blood began to trickle down from the pores of his ears. 
Both of them desired to subdue each other — and thus 
there arose a terrible conflict between Vali and Dundhuvi. 
Thereupon fought VSlli equalling Sakra in prowess, by fists 
knees, legs, stones and trees. And thus there was a skirmish 
between the monkey chief and the Asura. And in this 
conflict Asura’s strength was greatly reduced, while that of 
Sakra’s son was highly enhanced. Holding up Dundhuvi 
he threw him on the ground. And in that dreadful skirmish 
Dundhuvi was greatly reduced. And there was a profusion 




7 22 



rAmAfana. 



of blood falling from the ears of that one crushed down. 
Thereupon that one of mighty arms fell down to the earth 
and breathed his last. And taking up with his arms that 
lifeless one, the mighty VSli hurled him with great force at 
distance of a yojana . While thus thrown down by force, 
drops of blood, falling from his mouth, driven by the wind, 
fell upon the asylum of the great Saint Matanga. O great 
one, beholding the drops of blood there, the great ascetic, 
angered, thought within himself — “Who might be the author 
of this sprinkling of blood ? Who is that wicked-souled, 
vicious-minded, stupid person, who hath all on a sudden 
sprinkled me with blood ?” Saying this, that best of saints 
issued out (of the hermitage) and surveyed a lifeless buffalo 
lying on the earth, like unto a huge mountain. And apprehend- 
ing by virtue of his asceticism that this hath been committed by 
a monkey, he imprecated a mighty curse on the perpetrator 
(of that iniquitous deed). — “He shall not enter here who hath 
spoiled the sanctity of my forest with showers of blood. 
And surely he shall be killed (on entering). Forsooth shall 
that wicked one cease to exist if he strideth within * yojan* 
around my asylum, who hath felled these trees by throwing 
the body of the Asura. His counsellors or any one related 
to him, who shall resort to this my forest (shall meet with 
the self-same fate). They shall not live here; hearing this 
from me let them take their own ways. And even if they 
live here, forsooth, shall I curse them too. This my forest 
is being protected by me every day like unto my own son— 
and the monkeys are always used to destroy its leaves, trees 
and roots. Forgive them I to-day — but if I find any to* 
morrow, he shall be turned into stone for many -thousand 
years.” Hearing those words of the saint, the monkey held 
issued out (of the forest). And beholding them (coming 
out of the forest) Vali spoke — “Why have ye all — thedwdlen 
of the Matanga forest approached me — Is it all well with 
you?” Thereupon they related unto Vali, wearing a golden 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



7*3 



garland, the Cause of the Saint’s curse by him and other 
monkeys. Hearing those words, Vali approached that great 
ascetic and solicited him with folded hands. Disregarding 
him, the ascetic entered into his asylum and Vali was over- 
whelmed with the fear of curse. O Lord of men, afraid of 
the curse that monkey chief purposed to repair unto the 
mount Rishyamuka. Knowing for certain, O Rama, that 
hp shall not enter this forest, I have been living here 
with my ministers, devoid of fear and grief. Here is 
the collection of Dundhuvi’s bones, killed on account of 
his own haughtiness, resembling a huge mountain. These 
are the seven huge Sala trees, clothed in branches, which 
Vali could simultaneously divest of leaves by virtue of his 
prowess. I have related unto thee, O Rama, the incomparable 
prowess of his. Do thou tell me now, O hero, how canst thou 
destroy him in the conflict ?” Unto Sugriva speaking thus, 
Lakshmana smiling replied : — ‘‘Performing what, shalt thou 
confide in (Rama’s ability) to destroy Vali ?” Thereupon 
Sugriva bespake him — “ These seven Sala trees, before thee, 
the mighty Vali, formerly pierced, all at a time, with one 
shaft. If Rama can aim at one of these only with one 
arrow and if he can, O Lakshmana, throw the bones of this 
dead buffalo at a distance of two hundred bows — I shall 
consider Vali slain.” Having addressed Rama thus, Sugriva, 
having blood-red eyes, thought aside for a moment and again 
spoke unto Kakuthstha : — “He is heroic and proud of his 
prowess — his heroism and strength are known all over the 
world. He is a mighty monkey and incapable of being 
repressed in a battle. His actions are such as are above the 
power of the celestials. Revolving them within myself and 
terrified I have repaired to this mount Rishyamuka. And 
thinking of that lord of monkeys, unconquerable and irre- 
pressible I dare not leave this Rishyamuka. And exercised 
with fear and anxiety, therefore, I have been wandering in 
this mighty forest along with my devoted counsellors, headed 




7 2 4 



RlMlFANA. 



by HanumSn. And having secured in thee a worthy and 
sincere friend, O best of men, O thou that art loving 
unto thy friends, I have taken thy shelter like unto Him&vat 
himself. Cognizant am I of the prowess of my highly power- 
ful and wicked brother, but I have never witnessed thine in 
a conflict, O RSghava. I do not compare thee with VSli, 
nor do I disregard or frighten thee — forsooth have I greatly 
been alarmed by his terrible actions. O RSghava, thy words, 
patience and figure are the proofs of thy heroism— truly do 
they bespeak of thy valour like unto fire hidden by ashes/' 
Hearing those words of the high-souled Sugriva, Rima, 
smiling, spoke unto that monkey, saying — “O monkey, if 
thou dost not confide in my valour, soon shall I create thy 
confidence about my warlike abilities/' Having thus ad- 
dressed Sugriva and consoling him, the highly powerfnl 
RSghava, of mighty arms — Lakshmana's elder brother, lifting 
up easily with his thumb the dried frame of that Asura— 
Dundhuvi — hurled it at a distance of ten yoyanas . Beholding 
that Asura' s body thrown thus, Sugriva, again addressed 
unto the heroic RSma, before Lakshmana and the monkey 
herd, the following pregnant words: — “Friend, formed/ 
this body was wet and corpulent, and it was thrown with 
great difficulty by my brother VSkli, mad with voluptuousness 
And O RSghava, it is now divested of flesh and hence ligM 
like unto grass and consequently it has been hurled by thee 
with ease, O descendant of Raghu. And unable am I to 
ascertain who is the mightier ? There is a good deal of 
difference, O RSghava, between a body, wet and dried. 
There is still doubt, O worshipful one, which of you is the 
mightier? Truly shall thy strength be manifested in the 
piercing of one of these Sala trees. Having stringed thy | 
bow like unto the trunk of an elephant and stretching it tej 
thy ears, do thou shoot this mighty arrow. Doubt then 
is none that this arrow flung by thee shall bore this St b 
tree. There is no need of discussion any more ; do thou 




KISHKlNLHlKlNDA M. 



725 



faring O king, what dost thou think proper for me, con- 
tracted, as thou hast, friendship with me, with a solemn 
vow. Like unto the sun amongst the planets, like unto the 
Himalaya amongst the mountains, like unto the lion amongst 
the quadrupeds thou art the foremost of men in prowess.” 



SECTION XII. 



TT EARING those pleasant words of Sugriva, the highly 
effulgent R5ma, to create his confidence, took up bis bow. 
That one, conferring honors upon others, holding his ter- 
rible bow and a shaft, darted it towards the Sala , filling all 
the quarters with a sound. The arrow, clear as the gold 
itself, hurled by that one of mighty strength, perforating the 
trees, entered into the mountainous expanse and the sevenfold 
regions of the earth. And that shaft, gifted with wonder- 
ful velocity, piercing all the trees entered again into the 
quiver. Having beheld those seven trees bored by 
RUma's arrow, that monkey chief attained to an excess of 
surprise. Thereupon Sugriva, exceedingly glad, and de- 
lighted with his actions, bowing down his head on the earth 
and stretching his ornamented person on the ground, addressed 
with clasped hands, that heroic descendant of Raghu — Rama, 
the foremost of those conversant with religious lore, with 
the following pious words — “ O best of men, O lord, what of 
Vali, thou art capable of destroying with thy arrows, in 
the conflict, even the celestials headed by Indra. O Kakutstha, 
who can stand before thee in a battle, who hath pierced the 
seven trees, and the mountain, and the earth with one 
arrow ? Obtaining thee as my friend like unto Mahendra and 
Varuna, my grief hath been removed and I have attained 
■ . to an excess of delight. Do thou, O Kakutstha, even to-day 
destroy, for my welfare, my brother Vali. This I do pray 



* 

I 




726 



RAMlYANA. 



unto thee with folded hands.” Thereupon embracing 
Sugriva, of a pleasant countenance and like unto Lakshmana, 

the highly wise Rama spoke unto him, saying, "Soon 

shall we repair unto Kishkindha. — Do thou go before, 0 
Sugriva, and invite thy false brother, Vali, to battle.” There- 
upon proceeding quickly to Kishkindha, Vali’s capital — they 
all stood waiting in that dense forest, hiding themselves 
under the trees. With a view to call Vali, Sugriva, tying 
fast his cloth (around the waist) set up a terrible roar, as if 
rending the sky (therewith). Hearing the terrible uproar 
of his brother, the mighty Vali, highly angered, issued out 
of his city, like unto the Sun from the western shores (where 
he sets). Thereupon there arose a mighty conflict between 
Vali and Sugriva like unto the planets Mercury and Mars 
fighting with each other on the sky. The two brothers, 
exercised with ire, struck each other with palms like unto 
A$ani and with fists resembling adamant. Thereupon Rama, 
with bow in hand, beheld those two heroes resembling each 
other, like unto two Afwins. And Raghava did not discharge 
that mortal shaft untill he could perfectly ascertain who was 
Vali and who was Sugriva. In the mean time, being defeated 
by Vali, Sugriva fled away and not beholding Raghava, 
proceeded towards Rishyamuka. And wearied, worn out with 
blows, and having his person bathed in blood, he, followed by 
Vali, angered, entered that mighty forest. Beholding him 
enter that forest, the highly powerful Vali could not pursue 
him there for fear of the curse but said : — “Thou art released 
to-dav.” And Raghava too, with his brother and Hanumlo, 
entered that forest, where the monkey chief Sugriva was. 
Beholding Rama approach with Lakshmana, Sugriva, stricken 
with shame and casting his looks on the earth, addressed 
him poorly, with the following words : — “Accosting me with 
'do thou call (Vali), 1 displaying thy valour and making me 
struck by the enemy, what improper, conduct hast thou shown 
by me ? Thou should^ have spoken me then truly, O Rlghava, 




KISHKINDHAkANDA m. 



727 



— <4 I shall not destroy Vali” and I would not have gone there 
The high-souled Sugriva speaking thus poorly, Raghava again 
spoke unto him, saying : — "Do thou hear, O Sugriva, O 
worshipful one, why I did not discharge my arrow then. 
By ornaments, dress, stature and movements thyself and 
VSLli are just the same, O Sugriva. By voice, by words, by 
looks or by valour, O monkey, I could not make out any 
distinction. O best of monkeys, being thus surprised by 
the similarity of your countenances I could not discharge 
that foe-destroying and quick-coursing shaft. I was so 
afraid of thy resemblance with Vali that I thought that lest the 
mortal shaft might destroy thee. O hero, O lord of monkeys, 
if any disaster befalleth thee, who art already overwhelmed 
with miseries, through my ignorance or childishness, they 
shall be known all over the world. Mighty is the sin that 
ariseth from the destruction of one who hath been offered 
shelter. Myself, Lakshmana, and that exquisitely fine 
damsel — Sita — are all at thy service — thou art our only refuge 
in this forest. Do thou again enter into conflict, therefore, 
and do not fear, O monkey. And do thou behold even, in 
this very moment, Vali, moving restlessly on the breast of 
the earth, wounded by my shaft. Do thou make some mark 
on thy person, O lord of monkeys, by which I shall be able 
to recognize thee when engaged in a duel (with thy brother). 
O Lakshmana, plucking this auspicious Gaja flower, do 
thou put it round the neck of the high-souled Sugriva.” 
Thereat that highly graceful one with the garland around his 
neck appeared like unto a cloud. And appearing in a graceful 
person and attentive to Rama’s words he again entered 
Kisbkindh& with him. 




728 



rAxAvana. 



SECTION XIII. 



Thereupon the high-souled R3ma, along with Sugriva, 
proceeded from the mount Rishyamuka to Kishkiudhl, 
maintained by VWs prowess, raising up his gold crested 
mighty bow and taking his battle arrows like unto Aditya. 
The mighty Sugriva, bending low, proceeded before the high- 
souled R&ma and Lakshmana. They were followed by the 
heroic Hanum3n, the mighty Nala and Neela, and the highly 
powerful Tara, the leader of the monkey herd. They beheld as 
they proceeded, trees, lowered down with the weight of flowers, | 
rivers of clear water flowing to the ocean, mountain hollows, j 
hills, caves, cavities, and principal peaks and charming rills. 
They beheld on their way, pools filled with water clear as , 
Baidurya and beautified with lotuses — full blown and buds, 
and resounded with the cries of K&randhabas , swans, geese, 
Banchulasy water-fowls, Chakrabakas , and various other 
birds. They surveyed all around in the forest-land, deer 
ranging fearlessly at large and grazing on tender grass. 
They beheld frightful wild elephants having white teeth, 
ranging alone — the destroyers of river banks and enemies 
of pools. And observing many an infuriated monkey like 
unto elephants, resembling so many moveable mountains 
riving the mountainous expanses crusted with dust, and 
many other wild beasts and birds the followers of Sugriva 
wended their way. They proceeding quickly, Rlma, the 
descendant of Raghu, beholding the forest filled with tr e es, 
spake unto Sugriva, saying — “These trees skirted by plantain 
groves, dense as a collection of clouds, appear as clouds in 
the sky. Great is my curiosity, O friend, to learn what are 
these. And I wish to have my curiosity removed by thee. 11 
Hearing the words of the high-souled Rhghava, Sugriva 
began to describe that great forest.— “In this extensive 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M 



729 



asylum, O Raghava, removing the toil (of the travellers) 
filled with gardens and trees and abounding in delicious 
fruits, roots and water, dwelt seven Saints, having control 
over their senses. Those seven Saints, dwelling on the 
mountain, passed days and nights in water with their heads 
down and after seven nights used to live upon air. In 
this wise, passing seven hundred years they repaired bodily 
unto heaven. By virtue of their asceticism, this asylum is 
walled by trees and incapable of being conquerred even by 
Indra, the celestials and the Asuras. Birds or other wild 
animals do not enter this asylum ; whoever entereth this by 
mistake never returneth. There is audible, O Raghava, the 
Sound of the dressing of Apsaras. their sweet- winged accents 
and that of their music and drums ; and herein pervadeth the 
celestial fragrance. Hereburneth the fire Treti; and the smoke 
and cloud sable like unto the wings of a pigeon envelope the 
tops of the trees. And there appear the trees, having their 
tops saturated with smoke and cloaked with clouds, like 
unto so many Baidurya hills. Do thou, O Raghava, O 
virtuous-souled one, make obeisance unto them along with 
thy brother Lakshmana, with concentrated heart and folded 
palms. There resteth no sin in their persons, O Rama, who 
bow unto those self-controlled Saints.” Thereupon Rama, 
along with his younger brother Lakshmana, made obeisance 
unto those high-souled ones. And having paid homage (unto 
the sacred memory of those great ones) the virtuous-souled 
RSma, his (younger) brother Lakshmana, Sugriva and other 
monkeys, proceeded with delighted hearts. And wending 
a distant way from that hermitage of the seven great ones, 
they beheld Kishkindha, hard to conquer and occupied by 
Vaii. Thereupon, Rama, his younger brother and the 
monkeys taking their weapons, entered, to encompass the 
destruction of their enemies, the city (of Kishkindha) reared 
by the prowess of Indra’s son. 



92 



A 




73 ° 



RXMXrANA. 



SECTION XIV. 



They all, repairing quickly unto KishkindhS, V&li’s capital, 
stood waiting in the dense forest, hiding themselves behind 
the trees. Casting his looks all around in the forest, Sugriva, 
having a huge neck and fond of woods, became exceedingly 
enraged. Setting up a terrible uproar and rending the 
sky with his cry (Sugriva) encircled by his kinsmen, invited 
(Vali) to battle. Thereupon roaring like unto a huge ciood, 
preceded by a mighty vvind,Sugriva, gifted with leonine motion, 
and resembling the newly risen Sun, finding Rima expert in 
business, spake unto him, saying: — “Thou hast reached 
KishkindhS, V&li’s capital, adorned with gold, filled with 
pennons and instruments and surrounded by monkeys. Do 
thou make good thy promise, O hero, thou hadst made 
before to encompass the destruction of V&li like unto the 
season making the creepers filled with fruits." Being thm 
accosted by Sugriva, the virtuous-souled RAghava, the slayer 
of foes, addressed him with the following words : — “Uprooting 
the Gaja creeper, Lakshmana, hath placed it around tig 
neck as an emblem (to distinguish thee). Thou dost appee 
more beautiful, O hero, with this creeper around thy neck 
like unto the sun on the sky engarlanded by the stars. 1 
shall, O monkey, by the discharge of one shaft in the c oaSbA 
destroy thy fear and enmity proceeding from V&li. Do the* 
show me, O Sugriva, thy enemy, in the guise of a brat 
Wounded (by my shaft) V&li shall roll in the dust in 
forest. And if regaining his life he comes in thy view 
thou leave this field, showering abuses upon me. Thou 
behold seven Talas riven by a single shaft of mine a 
thou therefore consider V&li destroyed to-day by my 
in the conflict. Though fallen in distress before, I 
spoke an untruth, being always guided by an ncUnatioa 



k 




W'TT -frrm 



KlSHKINDHlRlNDAM. 



73 ' 



| 

' acquire virtue. "Like unto the deity of hundred sacrifices 
causing the rice fields bring forth their fruits by means of 
profuse showers, I shall fulfill my promise by dint of my 
prowess. Do thou therefore renounce all doubts about it. 
Do thou call Vali, wearing a golden garland. Do thou make 
such a sound, O Sugriva, as may bring out that monkey chief 
(from his city). He hath subdued his breath, is proud of 
victory and fond of warfare ; thou couldst not repress him 
before. Forsooth that V§Ii shall come out, leaving the 
company (of his wives). Hearing the war cry of his enemy, 
he shall never put up with it, specially, as he boasteth of 
bis prowess before his wives.” Hearing Rama’s words. 
Sugriva, having a gold-yellow hue, set up a terrible roar, 
as if riving the sky. Terrified by that sound, the kine, 
losing their countenance do move hither and thither like unto 
damsels, oppressed on account of their kings’ neglecting 
(to protect them). And the deer fly away like unto the 
borses defeated in a warfare. And the birds fall down on 
the earth, like unto planets, losing their purity. Thereupon 
confiding in R&ma’s words, that son, of Suryya (Sun) having 
bis energy enhanced by means of his prowess resembling the 
ocean agitated by the wind, began to roar like unto cloud. 



SECTION XV. 



w HILE residing in the female apartment, V&li heard the 
uproar of that high-souled Sugriva — his wrathful brother. 
<And hearing that mighty roar, shaking the whole world of 
creation, his pride was in no time, crushed and he attained 
t,o an excess of ire. Thereupon, Vali, having a golden hue, 
greatly exercised with wrath, instantly lost the effulgence of 
hb person like unto the sun possessed by Rahu. And looking 
terrible by his teeth and having eyes resembling burning fire 




73* 



RlMlYANA . 



in consequence of ire he appeared like unto a pond, having* 
the lotuses thereof uprooted with their stalks and fibres. And 
hearing that unbearable sound, the monkey, issued out speedily, 
as if riving the earth with his foot marks. Embracing him 
warmly and showing her affection, T3r5, afraid and mortified, 
addressed him with the following words, presaging his 
future welfare: — “Do thou renounce, O hero, this thy ire, 
coming like the course of a river, like unto one, leaving 
aside the garland, which he used in the night, after rising 
from bed. O monkey chief, do thou engage with him in 
conflict, tomorrow. O hero, thy enemy is very insignificant 
and hence there will be no deterioration on thy part. Thy 
hastily issuing out doth not please me ; do thou hear, why 
I do prevent thee. Formerly this Sugriva invited thee 
angrily to battle and being defeated and wounded by 
thee fled away. That one, who had been defeated and 
harassed by thee formerly, is now calling thee. Indeed it hath 
excited my fear. His pride, his energy, and his terrible uproar 
do indicate that there is nothing insignificant (at the 
bottom). I do not think Sugriva has come here without any 
to assist him. Forsooth he hath taken shelter of some body, 
and securing which he hath been setting up such a terrible 
uproar. That monkey Is clever by nature and gifted with 
intellect. And Sugriva shall not desire friendship with any 
one without having a test of his prowess. Hearken, O hero, 

I shall relate unto thee today, the auspicious words, I heard 
ere this, from the prince Angada. He hath related unto me 
all about Sugriva, what be heard from bis emmissaries while 
journeying in the forest. The two heroic sons of the king of 
AyodhySl — Rama and Lakshmana, incapable of being 
defeated in a battle and born in the race of Ikshavvkus, have 
repaired unto woods. To accomplish Sugriva’s welfare, those 
two heroes, hard to repress, have come here. He is the 
main stay of thy brother in the battle; Rama hath sprung 
up like unto the fire of dissolution and is the repressor of 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



733 



enemy’s prowess. He is the refuge of the saints and the 
.prime shelter of the afflicted. He is the protector of those 
grinded by their enemies and is the only possessor of fame. 
He is gifted with knowledge and intellect and ever abideth 
by his sire's commandments. Like unto Himalaya, the 
king of mountains, containing diverse metals, he is the 
mine of various accomplishments. It doth not behove 
thee therefore to enter into conflict with that high-souled 
R&ma, incomparable in prowess and hard to conquer in 
battle. Hearken, O hero, I desire to speak something more 
—I do not wish to excite thy wrath. Do thou instantly 
confer upon Sugriva, the dignity of heir apparent (to thy 
throne). O hero, O king; do not quarrel with thy y.ounger 
brother. I do consider it thy welfare to contract friendship 
with R&ma and regain Sugriva’s affections, renouncing all 
thy inimical feelings. This thy younger brother, even when 
remaining at a distance, should always be maintained by thee. 
Whether by thee, or at a distance, he is always thy best 
friend — I do not find his equal on earth. By conferring on 
him gifts and honors do thou receive him back. And do thou 
renounce thy enmity and let him sit by thee. Methinks, 
that large-necked Sugriva is thy best friend — there is no 
other resource for thee than to secure thy brother's friendship. 
If thou dost wish to go by my desire, if thou dost regard 
me as thy well-wisher, do thou perform what I do request 
thee for thy welfare. Be pleased and hear my beneficial 
words. It doth not behove thee to yield to the influence of ire 
—thy conflict with that son of the king of Ko£ala, gifted with 
the prowess of Sakra, will not conduce to thy welfare." 
Thereupon T&r§, spoke unto VSLli these suitable and well- 
meaning w f ords — but they did not satisfy him, possessed by 
Kala, as he was, on the eve of his destruction. 




734 



Rl Mi YANA. 



SECTION XVI. 



A fter Tara, having a moon-like countenance, had 
spoken thus, Vali, remonstrated with her and said — f, 0 thou 
of exquisite loveliness, my brother, and specially my enemy, 
is roaring lowly and haughtily— and how shall I put up with 
it ? O timid damsel, heroes, who have never been defeated 
and have never fled away from the battle field, had rather 
meet with death than put up with this ignominy. 1 am incapable 
of bearing this proud uproar of Sugriva, having a defective 
neck and desirous of entering into conflict with me. Fear- 
ing danger from R&ghava, thou needst not entertain any 
anxiety on my account. Why shall that virtuous-souled and 
grateful R&ma perpetrate iniquity ? Do thou therefore 
return with my other wives. Why do thou follow me again ? 
Thou hast already shown thy friendship and respect for me. 

I shall repairing thither, only fight with Sugriva. I shall 
crush down his pride and not destroy him. I shall deal with 
him mercifully in the battle as thou dost wish and being 
struck with fists and trees he shall fly away. Forsooth, that 
vicious-souled one shall not be able to withstand my pride 
and proficient skill in warfare. O Tlri, thou bast already 
displayed thy attachment unto me by giving me good 
counsels. By my life, do thou go back with the other 
members of my household, I shall only return after bringing 
about the discomfiture of my brother in the battle.” There- 
upon, Tara, dexterous and of sweet accents, embracing Vftli, 
went round him, with tears trickling from her eyes. And 
having performed Sastayana or the ceremony of benedic- 
tion, that one gifted with a knowledge of Mantras, and 
desirous of V&li’s success, went, overwhelmed with grief, to 
the inner-apartment in the company of other females. After 
TarS had departed to her own quarters with her female com- 




kishkindhAkAnda m 



735 



panions, he issued out of the city sighing like an enraged 
serpent. And the quick-paced Vali, exceedingly wroth, 
sighing, cast his looks around with a view to behold his 
enemy. And that highly efiulgent one espied Sugriva, 
having a golden yellow hue, tightly clothed, standing firm on 
the earth and shining like unto burning gold. And behold- 
ing Sugriva stationed thus, the greatly enraged Vali, of 
mighty arms, put on his clothes tightly well. Highly power- 
ful and closely habited, be, clinching his fists, proceeded 
towards Sugriva, and waited for the action. Sugriva too, 
clinching his fist and exceedingly wroth, proceeded towards 
Vali, wearing a golden garland. And beholding Sugriva, 
adept in warfare, having his eyes reddened with ire, advance 
quickly, Vali spake : — ‘‘Behold, I have clinched this terrible 
fist, arranging close my fingers ; and one blow from me will 
take away thy life.” Being accosted thus by Vali, Sugriva, 
exercised with wrath, spake unto him, saying, — “This my 
fist shall strike thee on thy head taking away thy life.” 
Thereupon being struck by Vali, waxing wroth and approach- 
ing him quickly he began to vomit out gore like unto a 
mountain having springs. And Vali too was struck down 
by Sugriva, fearlessly taking up a Sdla tree, like unto a 
mountain clapped by a thunderbolt. Being thus smitten by 
the tree and overwhelmed with the strike of Sdla he was 
troubled like unto a heavily laden boat in the midst of an 
ocean. And these (two brothers) gifted with mighty strength 
and prowess and motion of Suparna, and having huge persons 
fought with each other like unto the Sun and Moon on the 
sky. They were inimical to each other and intent on finding 
their mutual dark sides. And Vali, gifted with strength and 
prowess, fared better in the conflict, and that highly power- 
ful son of Sun — Sugriva, was worsted. And having his 
pride crushed down by Vali and strength greatly reduced, 
Sugriva iu anger pointed him out unto RAma. Thereupon 
there took place a mighty conflict between them like unto 




736 



RlMlYANA. 



Vitra and Vasava by means of trees with branches, hills, 
nails, hard as thunderbolts, fists, knees, legs and arms. And 
these two monkeys ranging in the forest, fought with each 
other, having their persons bathed in blood, and roaring 
like unto clouds. And R&ghava again and again beheld the 
weak points of that monkey chief Sugriva, losing his strength 
by and by. And beholding that chief of monkeys greatly 
distressed, the highly powerful and heroic R&ma cast his 
looks upon his shaft, having the destruction of V&li in view. 
And fixing on his bow an arrow resembling a serpent, he 
stretched it like unto Death drawing out his cycle of time. 
Being terrified by the sound of his stringing of the bow the 
birds and beasts, dismayed as on the eve of dissolution, fled 
away into different quarters. And a mighty shaft, like unto 
thunderbolt and resembling flaming fire, being burled by 
Rama, alighted on the breast of V&li. Being wounded by 
that shaft that highly powerful chief of monkeys, gifted with 
prowess fell down on the earth. Like unto Sakra’s banner 
in the full-moon of Aswin, V&li, with his throat choked with 
vapor, losing all sense and sighing hard, fell dead down 
to the ground. As the 'great God Hara emitted forth fire 
with smoke from his mouth, so that best of men like unto 
Death hurled an excellent, flaming and foe-destroying shaft, 
resembling gold and death itself. Thereupon being bathed 
in blood that son of V&sava, fell senseless on the ground, in 
the conflict like unto a blossoming Asoka growing on a hill 
and Sakra’s banner struck down on the earth. 



SECTION XVII. 

^Thereupon V&li, adept in warfare, wounded by Rlma’s 
shaft, fell down to the ground like unto a felled tree. Orna- 
mented with burning gold, he stretched the whole length 




KISH KIN DHA KIND A M 



737 

of his person on the ground like unto the banner of the 
Lord of celestials, loosened and thrown (off the chariot). That 
lord of monkeys being levelled to the ground, his kingdom 
appeared like unto the sky, shorn of the Moon. Though struck 
down to the earth, neither vitality, effulgence nor prowess 
did renounce the body of that high-souled one. That excellent 
gold and jewel-crested garland conferred on him by Sakra 
maintained the .vitality, effulgence and prowess of that lord 
of monkeys. Being adorned with that golden garland, that 
heroic lord, of monkey-herds, appeared like unto an evening 
cloud. Though felled to the ground, his beauty appeared as 
if divided into three, namely, his garland, his body and the 
shaft piercing his heart. The arrow thrown off Rama’s bow 
pointing out unto him the way to the celestial region, became 
an excellent means to that hero. Beholding the broad-chested 
and mighty-armed Vali, Mahendra’s son, wearing a golden 
garland and having a flaming countenance and yellow eyes, 
thus struck down to the earth, resembling a flameless fire in 
the field of battle, like unto Yayati, slipped from the abode 
of the celestials on the wane of his peity, like unto a 
tree falling down to the earth at the time of Dissolution, 
hard to repress as Mahendra himself, incapable to with- 
stand like Upendra, Rama, followed by Lakshmana, approa- 
ched and beheld him. And paying respects unto that hero 
falling on the earth like unto a flameless fire and eying him 
again and again those two highly powerful brothers, Rama 
and Lakshmana neared him. And beholding that highly 
powerful Raghava and Lakshmana, Vali addressed them 
with the following bold and pious words. And thereupon 
Vali, of mitigated prowess, waning vitality, motionless and 
stretched on the ground, spoke unto Rama, proud of warfare, 
saying these pregnant words. — “What merit hast thou 
reaped by destroying me, who was not engaged in fight with 
thee ? I was exercised with ire, being engaged in conflict 
(with another person) and for thee I have met with destruc- 



93 




73 8 



RlMlYANA . 



tion. People speak highly of thee, O Rama, on this earth, 
describing thee as coming of a high family, gifted with 
manliness and prowess, ever engaged in the welfare of thy 
subjects, compassionate, energetic, of firm resolution and 
knowing time. Punishment, control of passions, forgiveness, 
piety, firmness, truth, prowess and suppression of the 
wicked — these all are the royal virtues. And knowing thy 
high pedigree,and all these thy accomplishments I approached 
Sugriva with a hostile intention, albeit prevented by T§rS. 
Before I saw thee I had thought within myself ‘Forsooth 
Rama shall not destroy me, engaged as I am with another 
person and hence not prepared to fight with him/ I do now 
know thee as one who hath spoliated his soul through 
impious actions, feigning religion while in truth an 
irreligious person, resorting to all vicious deeds, like unto 
a well crusted with grass, unrighteous while passing under 
the cloak of honesty and religion like unto a hidden fire. I 
have not done thee any wrong either in thy kingdom or in 
thy city. Nor have I passed by thee. Why hast thou then 
destroyed me, who am a monkey ranging always in the 
woods, living on fruits and roots and who have come here to 
fight with anpther person ? It appears that thou art of a 
kingly father and of a graceful countenance. And, O king, 
there are marks of piety on thy person. Who, born in the 
race of Kshatryas, versed in religious lore, having his doubts 
removed and marks of peity on his person, perpetrates such 
an iniquitous deed ? Thou art born in the family of Raghus and 
known all over the world as being pious. Being clothed in 
righteousness why dost thou commit such an unrighteous act ? 
Chastisement, charity, forgiveness, piety, truthfulness firm- 
ness, prowess and the punishment of the iniquitous are the 
virtues of a king, O prince. We are, O R&ma, wild beasts 
ranging in the forest and living on roots and fruits — our 
nature is such — but thou art a man, O king. Land, gold and 
silver are the causes of dissension. But who is there who is 




KISHKINDHTlKIlND a m 



739 



avaricious enough to get by our forest habitations and 
fruits ? The royal virtue consists in humbly and freely 
administering discipline, favour and punishment. Kings 
■ by no means, should follow their whims. But thou art angry 
and unsteady by nature, capricious, perfectly narrow-minded 
in the discharge of thy royal duties and dost use thy bow and 
shafts (any where and every time). Thou hast no attachment 
for virtue, no comprehension of right things and art always 
guided by thy passions albeit thou art a lord of men. O 
KSkutstha, destroying me sinless, with thy shaft and perpe- 
trating such a digraceful act, how shalt thou relate it unto the 
pious. Those, who commit treason, destroy Brahmins and kine, 
Who are theives and always engaged in the destruction of ani- 
mals, and who are athiests and marry before their elder 
brothers are married, do all go to hell. The villainous, the ava- 
ricious, those who kill their friends and elope with their pre- 
ceptor’s wives, do always visit the land of the vicious. And 
there is not the least doubt about it. My skin is npt worthy of 
thy touch and my bones and hairs should always be avoided 
by the Virtuous. And my flesh is not worthy of being eaten 
by persons of thy piety. A hedge-hog a porcupine, an iguana, 
a hare and a tortoise — these five animals only, having five toes, 
"* are worthy of being eaten by the Kshatryas and Brahmins, 
O R&ghava. The wise, O Rlma, do not touch my skin and 
bones and my flesh is not worthy of being taken — I am that 
(monkey) having five toes who have been killed by thee. 
Alas ! disregarding the well meaning and truthful words of 
Tara, I have placed myself under the control of Kdla 
(Death). O Kakuthstha, the Earth hath got thee as her 
husband like unto a good natured damsel being wedded to 
a husband who hath forsaken his own religion. How art 
thou, who art wicked, narrow minded, a liar and ever intent 
upon bringing about others’ misfortune, bom of the 
loins of the high-souled Daparatha ? I have been killed by 
an elephant — Rlma, disregarding the virtue of the pious, 




740 



RlMlYANA . 



breaking the chord of character, and neglecting the goad 
religion. Perpetrating this inauspicious, and improper act, 
blamed of the worthy what shalt thou speak unto the pious 
when thou shalt return in their company f The prowess, thou 
hast displayed towards me, careless, O Rima thou dost never 
employ for the suppression of the iniquitous. O son 
of a king, hadst thou fought with me openly thou wouldst 
have, forsooth, seen the abode of Death being killed 
by me. O Rima, like unto a serpent destroying persons 
asleep, thou, that art under the control of vice, hast killed 
me, who am hard to repress, keeping thyself out of my sight 
in the battle. I have been killed by thee, desirous of 
encompassing Sugriva's well being. Hadst thou apprized 
me of thy object before, I would have got thee thy Maithili 
in the course of a day, and brought, by the neck, that vicious- 
souled Raksbasa — RSLvana, the ravisher of thy spouse with- 
out putting an end to his life in the battle. Whether in the 
deep ocean or in the region under the earth, I shall bring 
thy Maithili like unto an Asliyatari .* It is perfectly proper 
that Sugriva shall inherit my kingdom on my ascension to 
heaven. And it is equally improper that I have been vici- 
ously killed by thee in the battle. Every one in time meds 
with death and hence there is nothing to be sorry forme. 
But do thou think of a proper reply thou shalt give to tie 
people (when asked about the cause of my destruction)” 
Having said this, that high-souled Son of monkcy-chief, 
greatly distressed being wounded by (R&ma’s) shaft sad 
having his countenance dried up, became silent, fixing hi* 
look upon Rama, resembling the sun. 

* Here is an allusion. A prince of Daily as , named Hajagrifi, Sob At 
Vt\las at the end of Kalpa ; in the recovery of them he was slain fay VUs 
after his dciccnt as Malshya. — T. 



RlSHKINDHlKlNDAM. 



74 « 



SECTION XVIII. 



.A.ND thus R£ma was addressed by Vali, wounded and 
senseless, with those modest, pious and auspicious words. 
And being thus reproached he spoke unto that excellent lord 
of monkeys, gifted with virtue and other accomplishments, 
resembling the Sun shorn of its lustre, a cloud which has 
already discharged its waters and fire extinguished. — “Not 
cognizant of virtue, knowledge, passion and custom, why 
dost thou blame me like a child ? Why dost thou purpose 
to address me thus out of fickleness, consequent upon thy 
monkeyhood not asking thy wise elders recognized by the 
preceptors ? This land, abounding in hills and woods, belongs 
to the Ikswakus. Along with it was conferred on them the 
power of administering favour and chastisement unto 
beasts, birds and human beings. The upright, virtuous and 
truthful king Bharata, cognizant of virtue, knowledge and 
passion and ever engaged in adminstering favour and punish- 
ment, governs this kingdom. That king is said to be 
cognizant of time and place ; in him dwelleth modesty, 
truthfulness, prowess and a love for discipline. Ourselves and 
other kings, being commanded by him to practise piety, have 
been journeying in this wide world desirous of multiplying 
virtue. That foremost of monarchs, Bharata — lover of virtue, 
governing this entire earth, who dares perpetrate an iniquity ? 
Stationed in the excellent virtue of our own and placing 
Bharata’ s commandments on our heads, we shall consider 
how we shall punish them who go astray (from the path of 
virtue). Thou hast oppressed virtue and perpetrated a 
gross iniquity. Thou hast placed thyself under the control 
of thy passions and deviated from the track of royal duties. 
The elder brother, father, and the instructor — these three 
should always be regarded in the light of a father if they tread 




7 42 



RlMXVANA . 



the paths of virtue and morality. A younger brother, a son 
and an accomplished follower should always be regarded as 
sons. And virtue is always at the bottom of all such considera- 
tions. O monkey, the religion of the good is indeed very 
subtle and can comprehend great things — the immortal soul 
can understand what is good or bad. Fickle as thou art, hoir 
canst thou comprehend what is proper, consulting with thy 
monkey companions who are equally stupid and light-hearted, 
like unto one, born blind, leading with another such f I 
do fairly speak unto thee that it is not anger -only that has 
led me to bring about thy destruction. Do thou consider 
why I have killed thee— thou hast ravished thy brother’s wife 
renouncing that ever-existing virtue. Thou, the perpetrator 
of many evil deeds, hast got by Rum&, the wife of thy brother 
— the high-souled Sugriva. O monkey, thou hast thus 
violated the path of virtue. And thus I have punished thee 
who hast ravished thy elder brother’s spouse. O thou, the 
leader of monkey-herds — I find no other alternative than to 
punish him who acts against humanity and violates the sacred 
sanctions of custom. 1 am a Kshatrya coming of a high 
pedigree. I cannot put up with thy immoral conduct. Suites 
sanction the destruction of one who under the influence of 
passion ravishes his own daughter, sister and younger 
brother’s w'ife. This is Bharata’s commandment —the lord 
of earth, and we have been satisfying his orders. Thou hast 
disregarded virtue. A wise man, living in virtue, cannot 
let go one who hath passed by the sanctions of morality. 
Bharata hath sanctioned the destruction of the amorous; 
and we, O lord of monkeys, following his orders, thought 
proper, to encompass the destruction of one like thee who 
hath spoliated virtue and morality. Like unto Lakshmaua, 
I have contracted friendship with Sugriva. And with a view 
to regain his wife and kingdom, he resolved to engage in wtf 
well-being. I too also promised the same before the monkeys 
Ami how can a man of my position neglect to make goo i 




kishkindhXkKnda m. 



743 



his promise ? For these causes of very great moment, 
favoured by virtue, I have administered unto thee this 
condign punishment. Do thou now approve it. Thy discom- 
fiture is quite of a piece with the sanctions of morality — 
and to assist friends is one of the codes of religion. Hear, 
Manu hath composed a couple of couplets tending to the 
purification of character and highly. prized by the virtuous as 
well as myself. Those who, perpetrating iniquity, bear with 
fortitude the punishment, inflicted by their soverign get at 
the abode of the celestials being purified like unto the pious. 
People are freed from their sins, when they confessing their 
crimes, are either punished or forgiven. But the monarch 
who doth not punish the perpetrator of an evil deed, is 
visited by a mighty sin. Formerly an iniquity, like one 
perpetrated by thee, was committed by a devotee who 
was punished severely by my forefather Mandhdta . And 
other lords of earth punish in the same way the authors of 
misdeeds. What more, the perpetrators of crime, themselves 
undergo penances and are thus released from their sins. 
Therefore do not repent any more, O best of monkeys. The 
punishment, I have inflicted on thee, is in consonance with 
the sanctions of morality. We are not our own masters. 
Hearken, O best of monkeys, there is another argument (for 
thy destruction) ; and hearing which, O great hero, it be- 
hoveth thee to renounce thy ire. Many persons living on flesh, 
either lying in ambush, or openly catch and pierce by means 
of net, noose and trap, many a deer, terrified and trusted, 
taking to their heels or quarrelling with their companions, 
careful or careless. They are not to blame in this and I do 
not cherish, O best of monkeys, any mortification or ire for 
this. And even many royal ascetics, versed in religious 
lore, go a-hunting j and hence thou hast been killed by me 
with a shaft, O monkey, in the conflict. And I am justified 
in killing thee, whether thou dost fight or not since thou art 
a monkey. There is no doubt, O best of monkeys, that the 




744 



RlMXFANA. 



monarchs confer life and piety auspicious and hard to 
attain. It doth not therefore behove any one to injure them, 
to blame them and to use improper words by them — since 
they are the celestials ranging on this earth under the 
semblance of man. Not knowing virtue and growing .angry 
why dost thou blame me who am following the religion of 
my forefathers ?” Being thus accosted by RAma, Vhli, greatly 
mortified and informed of the principle of religion, observed 
no delinquency in R&ghava. Thereupon that lord of 
monkeys spake unto Rima, with folded hands, saying 
‘‘There is not the least doubt, O best of men, in all that thou 
hast said. An inferior person can by no means address his 
superior improperly. It doth not behove thee, O Rftghava, 
therefore to blame me for those unpleasant words which I used 
towards thee, out of foolishness. Thou hast acquired a 
practical mastery over the principles of religion and art 
ever engaged in the welfare of thy subjects. Thy eternal 
power of ascertaining the crime and meeting its condign 
punishment is perfectly clear. Do thou know me as the 
foremost of sinners and one who hath deviated from the track 
of morality. Do thou conduct me, with pious words, to a 
better land.” Vali, having his throat choked with vapour, 
addressed again and again, R&ma, with piteous accents, 
saying : — “I do not mourn so much for me, T&rft, or other 
friends as for my son Angada, eldest and wearing a golden 
An gad a* Brought up by me from his very infancy, he shall 
by my separation, wear away like unto a pqnd having its 
liquid contents drunk up. by an elephant. He is my only 
son, dear and born of TarfL A mere child and of tmripe 
understanding as he is, that one of mighty strength shoaU 
always be protected by thee, O RSma. Do thou regard 
favourably Sugriva and Angada. Thou art their protector, and 
chastiser punishing them for their sine. O king, O lord of 
men, it behoveth thee to regard Sugriva and Angada ia the 



A bracelet worn on the upper arm««-»T. 



kishkindhAkAnda m. 



7^5 



same light in which thou regardest Bharata and Lakshmana. 
It behoveth thee to so arrange as Sugriva may not disregard 
that chaste TarSl who is blameable for my folly only. He, 
who is favoured by thee, abideth by thy commandments and 
acteth after thy heart, can acquire kingdom, attain to heaven, 
and govern the earth. Desiring to have my destruction 
brought about by thee, 1 entered into conflict with my brother 
Sugriva, albeit prevented by Tara.” Having addressed 
RSma thus, the lord of monkeys stopped. Thereupon Rama 
consoled VSLli, of clear understanding with the following moral 
words, acceptable unto the Saints. “O best of monkeys, do 
thou not consider ourselves as well as thyself blame- 
able. We are more conversant, than thou, with the prin- 
ciples of religion. They never lose their virtue being pro- 
ficient in the mode of ascerting crime and punishing it — one 
administering punishment unto the criminal and the cri- 
minal receiving it And therefore receiving punishment 
{from me) thou hast been released from thy sins and acquir- 
ed a knowledge of religion. Do thou therefore renounce 
thy grief, thy illusion and the fear that is lurking in 
thy heart. It is impossible for thee, O foremost of 
monkeys, to withstand the course of dispensation. There is 
not the least doubt, O lord of monkeys, that Angada shall 
be brought up by me and Sugriva in the same way as he was 
by thee.” Hearing these sweet, collected and pious words 
of the high-souled RSma, — the represser of the enemies in a 
battle, — the monkey again addressed him with the following 
pregnant words — ”0 lord, O thou having Mahendra’s prowess, 
I do propitiate thee for my having insulted thee with 
improper words, senseless as I was being wounded by shafts. 
Do thou forgive me, O lord of monkeys.” 



94 




746 



RlMlVANd. 



SECTION XIX. 



JOEING thus accosted with reasonable words, that lord, of 
monkeys, lying on the ground and wounded with shafts, gave 
no reply. Having his limbs dissevered by stones, being 
struck with trees and wounded by R&ma's shaft, lie became 
senseless at the approach of death. His spouse Tftri heard 
that Vali, the foremost of monkeys, bad been killed in the 
conflict by RSma's shaft. Hearing the heart-rending news 
of her husband’s demise, she, big with a child, issued 
out of the mountain cave with a troubled heart. And 
beholding Rlma with a bow in his hand, the mighty 
monkeys, followers of Angada, fled away, terrified. Thereupon 
T&r& observed those monkeys flying away terrified like unto 
deer alienated from their herd, having lost their long . And 
the chaste lady, racked with sorrow, spoke onto those 
monkeys, afraid of Rama, wounded with shafts and exercis- 
ed with grief, saying: — “O monkeys, why are yc flying away, 
terrified and distressed, leaving behind that foremost of 
kings before whom ye were used to fight? Hath Vlli bees 
killed by R&ma, waiting at a distance with fleet and distant 
coursing shafts, being requested by Sugriva for kingdom ?" 
Hearing the words of that wife of the monkey, they, 
shapes at will, addressed that damsel with words, 
of being said on that occasion,-— 1 "O thou, haring thy wm 
alive, do thou go back and bring up thy son Angada. Detifc 
himself, under RSma's semblance, hath snatched away VML 
He was killed by (Rftma's) shafts, resembling thundeiMfc 
as if clapped by thunder itself, having bored trees and 
stones (hurled by VSli). That king of monkeys, 

Sakra’s prowess, being made away with v this host of r 
have been taking to their heels being overwhelmed 
consternation. Let the heroes defend the city and 
Angada on the throne. And on his being installed 




kisnkindhIkAnda m. 



747 



monkeys shall serve V&li’s son. O thou having a fine coun- 
tenance, the monkeys shall enter this stronghold, although 
it is a favourite place with thee. Herein dwell many forest- 
rangers, wifeless and having wives. And we are really 
afraid of them, avaricious, and formerly deprived of their 
wealth by us.” Hearing those words of the monkeys, lying 
at a little distance, that lady, smiling sweet, spoke unto them, 
words worthy of herself — “That great lord of monkeys, my 
husband, being dead, what shall L do with my son, my king- 
dom and myself ? I shall place myself at the feet of that 
fiigh-souled one, who hath been killed by Rama’s shaft.” 
Having said this, (TSLrSL) proceeded, overwhelmed with grief, 
weeping and striking her bead with her hands. While 
proceeding, she espied her husband lying on the ground like 
unto the destroyer of the lords of monkeys who have never 
been discomfitted in a battle field, hurling mountains like 
unrto VAsava hurling thunderbolts; emitting a roar like unto 
a big cloud assisted by a mighty wind ; resembling Sakra 
in prowess and like unto a cloud accompanied by rain ; the 
represser of repressers ; a mighty hero discomfitted by an 
' equally powerful one ; tike unto a lion killed by a tiger for 
flesh;, worshipped of all men; like unto a chaitya * adorned 
with pennons and altars, scattered and broken by Garuda 
with a view to kill serpents. And she espied R§ma reclining 
his person on a mighty bow, his younger brother and her 
husband's younger brother. Passing them by and getting 
at her husband and beholding him killed in battle, she, losing 
her sense, fell down to the ground. And thereupon rising 
again like one asleep, she, beholding her husband engarlanded 
by death, cried aloud, exclaiming “O son of worshipful 
sire/’ And beholding Tira Uke unto a she-elephant and 
Angada^ bewailing in this wise, Sugriva attained to an excess 
of grief. 



p • 



A pile of stones.— T. 




748 



XAA'll m AA r A. 



SECTION XX. 



Beholding her husband lying dead on the ground with 
the life-destroying shafts of R£ma, TfirS, having a moon- 
like countenance, approaching, embraced him. And seeing 
him slain with shafts like unto an elephant, resembling a lord 
of mountains and an uprooted tree, TSra, racked with grief 
began to bewail — “O hero, O foremost of monkeys, O powerful 
one, O thou terrible in warfare, why dost thou not welcome 
me to-day who am guilty of some iniquity by thee ? Rise, 
O best of monkeys, and lie down on a better bed ; monarch* 
do not stretch themselves on earth. O lord of earth, indeed 
earth is thy favourite wife ; since renouncing me, thou, 
though dead, art serving her with thy body. Evident it is, 
O hero, that while engaged in a lawful conflict, thou hadst 
created another city of Kishkindh&,in the region of the celes- 
tials. All thy enjoyments with me in nectar-smelling woods, 
have been brought to a close. Thou, the lord of monkey- 
herds, being slain, I am deprived of joy and hope and 
am sunk in the abyss of grief. Forsooth, my heart is uncom- 
mon hard, since beholding thee on the ground it hath not 
been sundered into thousand pieces being overwhelmed with 
grief. Sugriva’s wife was carried away and banished by thee 
and this is the result of thy action, O foremost of monkeys. 
O lord of monkeys, out of thy ignorance thou didst neglect 
all my well meaning words which I said, being intent on thy 
welfare and benefit. O worshipful one, thou shalt captivate 
today, the hearts of the dexterous Apsar&s, proud of their 
youth and beauty. Forsooth, thou hast been by force brought 
under the control of Kala , since thou hast been discomfitted 
by Sugriva, albeit thou art above the control of otbeis> 
Destroying Vali unseasonably, while engaged in conflict with 
another person, and perpetrating such an iniquitous deed* 




KISH KIND Hi KIND A M. 



7 49 



KSkuthstha doth never relent. Unused to miseries before 
how shall I, being an object commiseration, put up like one 
helpless, with my widow-hood and grief. How shall the 
heroic and youthful Angada, brought up in luxury and happi- 
ness, be regarded by his uncle, senseless with wrath ? Do 
thou cast for good, O my son, thy looks towards thy piou9 
sire, for since now it will be hard for thee to see him again. 

„ Do thou console thy son, favour me with orders, smell his 
head, as thou art going to journey in a foreign land. By des- 
troying thee, R£ma, hath performed a great action, since by this 
he hath been released from his vow unto Sugriva. O Sugriva, 
do thou gain thy ends and get back thy Ruma • devoid of 
anxiety do thou govern thy kingdom — thy enemy, thy brother 
hath been slain. O lord of monkeys, why dost thou not 
welcome me, thy beloved spouse, who am bewailing thus ? 
Behold, thy other wives are also mourning in the same wise.” 
Hearing the bewailings of that she-monkey, others, taking 
Angada, distressed and overwhelmed with grief, began to 
cry piteously. — “O hero, having Angada on thy arms, why 
art thou proceeding on a journey for good in a foreign land 
leaving behind (thy son) Angada. It doth not behove thee (to 
leave aside) thy dear son, gifted with diverse accomplish- 
ments and wearing a charming and beautiful cloth. O thou 
of long arms, O lord of monkeys, if I have offended thee iu 
any way, do thou forgive me, after ascertaining my crime. O 
hero, I touch thy feet with my head.” Bewailing thus pite- 
ously with other she-monkeys, T&ra, having a blameless 
countenance, stationing herself where V*Ui was, resolved to 
put an end to her being by fastings. 




75 ° 



RAUlYANA. 



SECTION XXI . 



Thereupon beholding T£r& fallen (on the ground) like 
unto a star dropt down from the sky, Hanumln, the lord of 
monkey -herds, consoled her again and again. — “Animals, im- 
agitated, attain to happiness or misery, as an outcome of their 
actions performed (in their previous existence) by merits or 
demerits. Why dost thou mour-n for others, thyself being an 
object of moruning j Why dost thou feel comm isseratiom for 
the poor, thyself being poorly? In this body like unto a bubble 
who is there who mourneth for another ? It behoveth thee 
now, O thou having thy son alive, to look after prince 
Angada and think of those duties which remain to be 
executed by thee (after the demise of V&li). Do thou know 
that life and death of the animals is very unsettled. It is 
therefore proper to perform what tends to the welfare of after- 
life. It doth not behove thee, O learned damsel, to mourn 
like others. He even, who (while living) was surrounded by 
thousands of monkeys cherisbiug hopes, hath met his 
destined end. This hero discharged his royal duties in 
consonance with the sanctions of morality and was gifted 
with various kingly accomplishments such as conciliatio* 
charity and forgiveness. He hath attained to the land ef 
kings and it becometh thee not to mourn for him. O blamo 
less damsel, all these foremost of monkeys, this thy son 
Angada. this kingdom of the monkey chief, do belong to 
thee. Do thou soon despatch, O passionate lady r these tvs 
(Angada and Sugriva) exercised with grief as they are (for 
the performance of Vlli's funeral rites). And abiding by tip 
commandments let Angada govern the earth. Let Angada 
perform all those ceremonies, which should be gone tfiro^h 
by sons according to the Sastras and which are for lit 
well-being of the king ; this is the time for the performnaet 





KISHKINDHAkXnDA M. 



75 1 

of^those funeral rites. Performing the funeral ceremonies 
of the lord of monkeys do thou install Angada. And behold- 
ing thy son thus established on the throne thou shalt be 
able to pacify thy grief ?” Hearing those words of HanumSn, 
Tftri, racked with grief consequent upon the loss of her 
lord, besp&ke him who was standing there : — “I would rather 
die with this hero who hath been slain than have hundred 
sons like Angada. I cannot myself govern this kingdom nor 
can I confer it upon Angada. Such duty devolves upon his 
(Angada4) unde Sugriva now. O HanumSn, do thou not 
consider that I shall confer this kingdom upon Angada — O 
best of monkeys, father is son’s friend (in this respect) not 
mother. There is no other resource for me tending to my 
welfare both in this world and the next -than taking refuge 
unto this lord of monkeys. It is becoming for me to serve 
this bed which hath been resorted to by the hero, slain (and 
lying before me.) 



SECTION XXII. 



V ALi, ranging on the verge of death, casting his looks 
a rounds and sighing faintly, espied his younger brother 
Sugriva before him. Welcoming that lord of monkeys with 
clear accents, Vili addressed him affectionately saying : — “O 
Sugriva, do thou not take to thy heart the improper conduct 
I have shown towards thee, being attracted by inevitable 
foolishness, subject as I was to sin. Methinks, O brother, it 
is not our fortune to enjoy at the same time the double bliss 
of fraternal affection and the enjoyment of kingdom, or else 
why has it happened otherwise ? Do thou acquire to-day 
this kingdom of the forest-ranges and know me as one who 
hath departed to the abode of Death. Soon shall I renounce 




752 



RllLlrANA. 



my life, kingdom, my exquisite grace and my blameless 
fame. It behoveth thee, O hero, O king, to perform what 
I shall speak unto thee in this plight, however difficult it 
might be. Do thou behold Angada fallen on the ground with 
tears in his eyes — a little boy, incapable, brought up in 
luxury and deserving happiness. Do thou maintain this my 
son, dearer than my life, like unto thy own son, born of thy 
loins, satisfying all his wants in my absence. O best of 
monkeys, like unto me, thou art his father, protector, con* 
ferrer of gifts and remover of fear. This graceful son of 
Tara equals thee in prowess and shall precede thee in the 
destruction of Rakshasas. This youthful Angada, Hit's 
son, gifted with energy and strength, shall perform befitting 
exploits displaying his prowess in the battle. Surasen’s 
daughter is wonderfully expert in ascertaining subtle things 
and giving counsels in the time of danger. Do thou, without 
the least doubt perform what shall the chaste lady instruct 
thee to do ; for Tar&’s advice never goes without effect It 
behoveth thee to perform R5ghava’s service fearlessly or else 
thou shalt be visited with sin : on his being insulted thou 
shalt be injured. O Sugriva, do thou put on this celestial 
golden garland — herein dwelleth the bounteous Sree who 
shall renounce me after my death. ,, Having been accosted 
thus by Vali, out of fraternal affection, Sugriva renouncing 
joy again became pale like unto the Moon possessed by Rika 
Renouncing his inimical feelings, being thus addressed by 
Vali and carrying out his words energetically SngmU 
accepted the golden garland as ordered (by him). And con* 
ferring (upon Sugriva) that golden garland and beholdi^ 
his son before him, Vali, resolved upon death, spake udfei 
Angada, saying : — ' "Do thou place thyself now under tit 
control of Sugriva, ascertaining time and place, patting up 
with misery for thy welfare and injury. O thou having lotg 
arms, Sugriva shall not regard thee much, if dost thou remakl 
in the same wise in which thou hadst been brought op If 



J 



KISHKlNDHlKlNDA M. 



753 



me before.* O slayer of foes, do thou never mix with 
Sugriva’s enemies, and place thyself always under Sugriva’s 
control, having subdued thy senses and being intent upon thy 
master's (Sugriva’s) welfare. Do thou not cultivate too much 
of friendship nor be wanting in it — for both of these extremes 
are sources of disasters. Do thou therefore follow the golden 
mean.’ 1 After he had said this, his eyes became expanded, his 
teeth were opened and his appearance became ghastly. And 
greatly pained by shafts he breathed his last. And there- 
upon, the monkeys, the foremost of those who go jumping, 
having lost their chief, bewailed and cried. On that monkey 
chief’s departure to the land of celestials, Kishkindha was 
divested of her lord, and gardens, hills and woods were all 
rendered lonely. That best of monkeys, who fought a dread- 
ful battle with the high-souled Gandharbas , being dead, 
all other monkeys became of pale countenance. “Vali entered 
into a terrible conflict with the mighty-armed Golava and 
fought for ten years and five, for nights and days without 
respite. And on the sixteenth year, Golava was killed. 
Bringing about the destruction of that wicked Gandharba , 
V2Lli, having terrible teeth, saved us all from fear. How hath 
he been killed to-day ?” Like unto kine, incapable of enjoying 
peace in a mighty forest filled with lions, their chief being dead, 
these forest-rangers could not attain to felicity on the demise 
of that lord of monkeys. Thereupon, Tara, sunk in the 
gulf of disaster, eying the countenance of her deceased lord, 
fell down to the ground embracing Vali like unto a creeper 
clinging for its support to a mighty but broken tree. 

* The significance of the passage is as follows : — Thou wert a mere child 
while I brought thee up. But now thou art a grown up young man and this is 
the time for thee to serve thy elders. Do thou therefore serve Sugriva.— T. 




754 



RlMXYANA. 



SECTI ON XXIII. 



Thereupon smelling the face of that lord of monkeys, 
Tar£ again addressed her deceased lord, known all over the 
world, saying: — “O hero, disregarding my words, thou art 
lying on the uneven earth, hard and filled with gravels. 0 
lord of monkeys, the earth is dearer unto thee than I, since 
thou art lying there embracing her and art not welcoming me. 
O hero, O dear, O brave lord, wonder it is that God under 
the semblance of R5ma, hath placed himself under tbe 
control of Sugriva ; hithertofore he shall be regarded as a 
hero. Why art thou not awake, hearing the bewailings of 
bears and monkeys who used to wait upon thee, powerful, 
as well as that of Angada and myself? Alas ! thou art lying 
on this bed of the heroes, being slain in the battle, where 
formerly, thy enemies destroyed by thee, used to lie down. 0 
thou born of a pure family, O thou that art fond of warfare, 
O my dear, O conferror of honors, whither hast thou departed 
making me husbandless ? Let not the wise, henceforth, 
confer their daughters upon the heroes. Alas ! behold me, 
the wife of a hero, made a widow in no time. Shattered 
is my honor and destroyed is my happiness and I am sunk 
in the deep abyss of grief. Forsooth, this my firm heart is 
not sundered into hundred pieces, beholding my husband 
slain! Thou art my friend, my dear husband and a great 
hero— and thou hast met with destruction, being struck by 
another man. A husbandless woman is always styled by tbe 
wise as widow, although she might have a son and enough 
of riches. O hero, thou art lying down in a pool of blood 
issuing out of thy own person, like unto thy own bed haviug 
a red -dyed bed-sheet. Thy body is on all sides besmeared 
with blood and dust and I am incapable of embracing thee 
with my arms, O best of monkeys. Surely hath Sngri** 




kishkindhAkAnda m. 



7 55 



satisfied his hostile intention to-day, whose fear hath been 
removed by one shaft, discharged by Rama. Thyself depart- 
ing to the land of the dead, I have been eying thee simply, 
being prevented from touching thy person by the shaft 
piercing thy heart”.* Thereupon Neela took out that shaft 
from the person of (Vali) like unto a flaming serpent lurking 
in a mountain cave. There beamed the shaft extracted 
from his body like unto the rays of the Sun, stationed on the 
summit of the setting hill. And there poured forth from all 
his wounds, streams of blood, like unto showers of melted 
copper and other metals falling from a mountain. And 
( TSr5 ) washed, with tears, her heroic husband’s body 
covered with dust and wounded with weapons. Beholding 
her husband thus slain and besmeared with blood, she spake 
unto her son, Angada, having coppery eyes, saying : — “Behold 
this terrible declining stage of thy Sire. Here is the end of his 
hostilities collected by his impious actions. O my son, do 
thou bow unto thy kingly father, the conferrer of honors, who 
hath departed to the abode of Death, having a flaming person 
like unto the rising Sun.” Thus accosted, Angada rose up 
and, saying, “I (do touch my Sire's feet),” embraced his father’s 
feet with his plump arms. (Thereupon Tara said) — “Saying 
‘Do thou live long’ why dost thou not welcome Angada, 
to-day as before, who hath bowed unto thee ? I am with 
my son, standing by thee who art dead, like unto a cow 
with her calf, having the bull slain by a lion. How hast thou, 
without me, thy wife, bathed in the water of Rama’s shafts, at 
the end of thy battle-like sacrifice ? Why do I not behold here 
that favourite golden garland of thine, which was conferred 
on thee by the lord of celestials, pleased in a battle ? Royal 
grace hath not renounced thee, O conferrer of honors, albeit 
thou art dead, like unto the rays not quitting the king of 
mountains, even after the Sun is set. Thou didst not act by 

• The meaning is : — Lest by my touching that shaft thou feelcst a greater 
pain. — T. 



756 



RAMlYANA. 



my wholesome words, nor could I prevent thee. And I am 
now destroyed with my son, along with thee in the battle. 
Truly hath Sree (goddess of wealth) renounced me/ 1 



SECTION XXIV. 



^Beholding T&rl emerged in a deep and mighty ocean 
of grief, V&li’s younger brother was overwhelmed with 
penitence, in consequence of the unbecoming destruction of his 
brother. And seeing her countenance full of tears, the 
high-souled (Sugriva), racked with grief and repentance, ap- 
proached slowly R&ma along with his followers. And nearing 
him, with a bow in his hand, having arrows like unto serpents, 
famed and having auspicious marks on his person, he spake 
unto RSghava, seated there, saying—* "O lord of men, thou 
hast fulfilled thy promise by carrying it out into practice ; 
and as for wretched me, O son of a king, 1 shall refrain today 
from all enjoyments. This queen lamenting piteously, these 
subjects and retinue bewailing, being overwhelmed with grief, 
this king being slain, how can kingdom please me t O Rima 
out of anger, and passion, and on account of my being insul- 
ted by him, I did formerly desire to bring about my brother’s 
destruction. But that lord of monkey-herds being slain, 0 
best of Ikshwakus, I am truly pierced to the quick with 
anguish. I do prefer living for good in the mount Rishya* 
muka, earning my livelihood somehow or other, to the 
accession of heaven by destroying (Vftli). This highly 
intellectual and high-souled one spake unto me "Do thos 
range at large, I do not wish to destroy thee/ 9 Soch 
words were really becoming of him, O Rftma. And these 
words and this action become me (vile as I am). How 
can a brother, O R§ma, however avaricious he aig|t 
be, relish the destruction of his qualified brother, COS* 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



757 



paring the happiness of a kingdom, with the grief (con- 
sequent upon his brother’s demise) ? He did not desire 
to slay me, lest his greatness might be spoiled ; but alas ! 
through my wicked sense, I performed an iniquity by 
taking the life of my brother. Being struck by him with 
branches of trees, while I fled away and wept, he, consoling 
me, said only “Do not do this again.” He all along main- 
tained his fraternal feelings, his honesty and piety ; but (woe 
to me) I have displayed my wrath, passion and monkey-hood. 
O friend, like unto the lord of celestials perpetrating sin 
by destroying Biswarupa, I have been, by bringing about 
the destruction of my brother, visited with this sin, beyond 
comprehension, avoidable, undesirable and invisible. Indra’s 
sin was shared by earth; water, trees and women ; but who 
is there who will bear and desire to participate this monkey’s 
sin ? Perpetrating such an improper and irreligious act, tend- 
ing to the decay of my family, I do not deserve the respect of 
my subjects and the heir-apparentship $ what of kingdom, O 
Righava. I am the perpetrator of a vile and disgrace- 
ful sin, blamed of all in this world. And like unto a 
current of rain going downwards, this mighty grief hath 
overcome me. This mighty and infuriated elephant of a sin, 
having the destruction of a brother as its body, repentence, 
as its trunk, head, eyes and tusks, hath been crushing me 
like unto the banks of a river. Alas ! O best of kings, this 
unbearable sin hath been driving away all pious feelings from 
my heart like unto alloy leaking out of discolored gold when 
molten in fire, O Raghava. Methinks, for me, O Righava, 
these mighty monkeys and Angada are almost half-dead 
(with grief). A good-natured and obedient son is rare. Where 
is to be found Angada’s equal ? O hero, there is no such 
land where I may meet again my brother. The heroic Angada 
shall not live to-day — and if he lives, his mother shall live to 
bring him up. Forsooth, without her son, she shall not 
live long. Therefore shall I enter this flaming fire with a 




753 



RlMlFANA. 



view to place myself on the same level with my brother 
and his son and all these mighty monkeys shall engage 
in quest of Sita, abiding by thy commandments. O son of 
a king, they shall all carry out thy orders even in my absence, 
do thou, therefore, order me (to enter fire) who am the destroyer 
of my own race, have performed an inquity and do not 
deserve living any more.” Hearing the words of V&li’s youn- 
ger brother, who was bewailing thus, RAma, the heroic 
descendant of RSghu and the slayer of foes, remained stnpified 
for some time with tears in his eyes. In the mean-time, Rlma, 
patient like unto the protector of the world, worked with 
curiosity, looked again and again towards the bewailing Till 
sunk in the gulf of disaster. Thereupon the principal coun- 
sellors raised up the brave spouse of the lord of monkeys, 
having graceful eyes and lying 011 the earth, embracing her 
husband. And snatched away from her husband and trembl- 
ing, she beheld Rama, with bow and arrows in his hand, 
burning like unto the Sun by virtue of his own effulgence. And 
beholding him gifted with all royal marks, having beautiful 
eyes and never seen before, that one, having the eyes of 
a fawn, thought within herself. “This great one must 
be Kakuthstha.” And the worshipful T 2 r 3 , worked with 
grief, and overwhelmed with disasters, bewailing, neared 
quickly that high-souled one, resembling the lord of celestiab 
and hard to approach. And having reached the pore-sonled 
Rama, who had his ends fully attained in battle, the high- 
minded Tara, having her frame worked with grief, spake 
unto him, saying : — “Thou art immeasurable, hard to 
approach, highly pious, prudent, of controlled senses and 
increasing fame, forgiving like unto earth and of blood-red 
eyes. Thou hast bow and arrows in hand, art highly powerful 
and of a tough body. And renouncing human grace thus 
hast assumed the grace of a celestial person. Do thou stag 
me with that self-same shaft with which my dear one wtt 
slain. And thus slain, O hero, I shall near him, for Vlli doth 



KISHK1N DH]lK\ND A M. 



7 59 



not relish the company of any other woman but me. O 
thou having eyes resembling clean lotus-petals, tjiis 
( hero ) departing to the abode of celestials and not 
beholding me there, shall not delight in the company of 
Apsaras , wearing diversified garments and copper-colored 
corronets. Even in the land of celestials, O hero, Vali 
shall turn pale with grief in my separation, like unto 
thee in the picuresque dale of the Lord of mountains, separa- 
ted from the daughter of the king of Videha. Thou knovvest 
well that a handsome man is greatly afflicted with the 
seperation of his spouse ; and knowing this, do thou slay me, 
and Vali shall not be tormented with grief consequent upon 
ray absence. High-souled as thou art, thou art thinking that 
thou shalt, slaying me, be visited with a sin arising from the 
destruction of a female. But do thou kill me, O son of a 
king, knowing me as the soul of V&li, and thou shalt not be 
responsible for destroying a woman. According to the Vedas 
and various other sacred texts, wives are inseparably blended 
with their husbands. And the wise say that there is no 
other gift better than that of a wife in this world. Thou 
shalt, O hero, confer me religiously upon my dear one 
and by this gift thou shalt be saved from the sin consequent 
upon killing me. It doth not behove thee not to kill me, 
who am exercised with grief, without my lord, snatched away 
from him and reduced to such a (pitiable) plight. O lord 
of men, 1 cannot live long without that highly intelligent 
lord of monkeys, having an elephantine gait and wearing an 
excellent golden garland.” Thus accosted, the high-souled 
lord consoling T^ra, spake unto her the following well- 
meaning words. — “Do thou not lose thyself, O wife of a hero. 
This whole world of creation is being guided by God’s 
dispensation. And by Him is administered misery or happi- 
ness as people say. These three worlds cannot neglect His 
dispensations and are entirely subject to Him. Thy son 
shall attain to the heir apparentship of the throne and thou 




760 



RlblrANA. 



shalt enjoy excellent joy therefrom. This hath been decreed 
by the Almighty. Wives of heroes do never relent. 11 Being 
thus consoled by the high-souled (RSLma)' gifted witlTprow— 4 
and the slayer of foes, Tfirl, the wife of a heroic husband, 
and wearing a graceful garment, ceased bewailing. 

SECTION XXV. 

Thereupon, KSkutstha, with I<akshmana, equally ag- 
grieved, said, consoling Sugriva, and Tirfi together with 
Angada. — “Grief and lamentations do not tend to the 
welfare of the deceased. It therefore behoveth ye ta 
perform the after ceremonies. Ye have satisfied the worldly 
practice with a profuse discharge of tears. It is not proper 
to delay the performance of appointed actions. Time is the 
prime cause in this world, and the source of the accomplish- 
ment of actions. And Time it is that leads men to actions. 
No one is the lord of another person, and no one leads hia 
to actions. People are subject to their actions of previous 
existence and Time aids them. Even the Eternal being can* 
not withstand the ways of Time. He never decayet h — a n d 
no one else can withstand the course of Time. It h— h 
no friend, no cause and no one can overcome it. It h— h 
no kinsman, no relation ; even it is not subject to itsdL 
The wise can percieve the work of Time. Piety, weatt 
and desire are all subject to it. Vhli, the lord of monkef* 
hath attained to his own true state, reaping the fruits of his 
actions, acquired by virtue of his royal accomplish— rail 
— namely, forgiveness and charity. The abode of the cel—* 
tials, which was conquered by this high«souled one by Hi 
former piety, hath now been occupied by him after icaiga— g ; 
his body. This is the best course of Time that hath ha — d 
attained to by the lord of monkey-herds. No note wife] 



KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 76 1 

lamentations therefore ; do thou perform the actions that 
are worthy of being performed on this occasion/ 1 After 
fULma had spoken thus, Lakshmana, the slayer of foes; 
addressed Sugriva, senseless with grief, with the following 
sound words : — “SugrivS, do thou perform the funeral 
ceremonies of VSLli along with TSr& and Angada. Do 
thou collect for cremation many a dry fuel and celestial 
sandal. Do thou console the unfortunate Angada, who is 
beside himself with grief. Do not conduct thyself like an 
ignorant person, for this city is now under thee. Let Angada 
bring clothes, garlands, scents, clarified butter, oil and 
Other necessary articles. O TSni, do thou go and bring soon 
* conveyance $ for speediness is a special virtue on an occa- 
sion like this. Let the monkeys dress themselves who can 
Convey this hearse. The powerful and the capable only shall 
Carry V&li”. Having thus addressed Sugriva, Lakshmana, the 
enhancer of Sumitra’s joy and the destroyer of foes, stood 
before his elder brother. And hearing the words of Laksh- 
mana, the counsellor respectfully entered the cave with a 
view to bring the conveyance. And taking that conveyance 
carried by the monkeys and worthy of being carried by the 
heroes, he issued out again of the cave. It had a celestial 
throne and was like unto a war-chariot and had trees and 
birds painted on it. It was painted on all sides with the 
figures of foot soldiers, had latticed windows and was like 
unto the car of the Siddhas — spacious and artistically and 
stoutly built by artizans with beautiful carvings like unto a 
wooden hill. It was ornamented with excellent ornaments 
and beautiful garlands, sprinkled with red sandal and skirted 
with strong ribs. It was covered with flowers and lotus- 
- garlands, crusted with precious clothes and had the colour 
"of the rising Sun. Beholding such a conveyance, Rama 
Spake unto Lakshmana, saying— “Do thou soon conduct the 
funeral service of Vili.” Thereupon Sugriva, along with 
Angada, placing V&li on the conveyance, began to bewail. 

96 




76 2 



RAAJlYANA. 



And placing the lifeless body of Vftli on it, he covered it with I 
various ornaments, garlands, and clothes. Thereat Sugrira, 
the king of monkeys, ordered for the performance of VUi's 
funeral rites. “Let the monkeys go before, scattering many 
a precious jewel and let the conveyance follow them. Let 
the monkeys perform the obsequies of our master with such 
grandeur as befits the riches of the kings on this earth” 
With a view to perform the funeral ceremonies of Vali, the 
counsellors and other monkeys, having lost their king and 
embraced Angada, proceeded weeping. And other subject 
monkeys followed them. And all other she-monkeys, headed 
by T&ra, having lost their lord, bewailed, exclaiming again \ 
and again — ”0 hero, O hero”.— And they, thus bewailing 
piteously, followed their lord. And in response to the be- 
wailings of she-monkeys, hills and forests, as if, bewailed ona'l 
sides. Monkeys, ranging in the forest, made funeral piles 
the banks of the hill-streams and in solitary watery nook^ • 
Thereupon laying down from their shoulders the conveyance * 
those foremost of monkeys stationed themselves in a cornea"* 
being stricken with grief. And T&r&, beholding her husband’^ 
body on the conveyance, placed his head on her lap ancJ 
bewailed, overwhelmed with griet. “O lord of monkeys l O 
my lord ! O my dear one ! O thou used to luxuries ! O thou 
having long arms ! O my darling ! behold me. Why dost 
thou not behold these monkeys, racked with sorrow ? O 
conferrer of honors, thy countenance looks as if beaming with 
joy ; although thou art dead, and thou appearest as if alive, 
having the hue of the setting Sun. O monkey. Death himself, 
under the semblance of Rama, is attracting thee, who with 
one shaft in the battle, hath rendered us all widows. O best 
of kings, these she-monkeys cannot go by jumping. Dost thou 
not percive that they have travelled so far on foot ? Those 
thy wives, having moon-like countenances, have always thy 
welfare in view. Why dost thou not, O best of monkeys, 
cast thy looks towards them and Sugriva? O king, these 




kishkindhAkUndam, 



7*1 



thy counsellors, tfcy wives headed by Tarii, and all these 
citizens are bewailing around thee. O slayer of foes, do 
thou despatch thy counsellors to the city and we shall 
all enjoy in this forest, excited with amour!' The other 
she-monkeys, worked with sorrow, raised up T§r& bewailing 
thus being exercised with grief consequent upon the demise 
of her husband. Thereupon Angada along with Sugriva, 
overwhelmed with grief, weeping, placed his Sire’s body on 
the funeral pile. And putting fire duly, he circumambulated his 
Sire, bound for a journey for good. Having duly cremated 
VMi’s body, the foremost of monkeys arrived at a river of aus- 
picious water with a view to perform the watery ceremony. 
And all these monkeys along with Sugriva and Tara, placing 
Angada before them, sprinkled water. And the highly power- 
ful K&kuthsha, equally aggrieved like Sugriva, being as poorly, 
cronducted duly the obsequious ceremonies of V&li. Thereupon 
cremating V&li, gifted with unequalled prowess, slain with 
one shaft of the foremost of Ikswakus, and like unto flaming 
*ire, Sugriva appeared before R&ma who was in the company 
of Lakshmana. 



SECTION XXVI. 



A NP thereupon those foremost of monkeys waited there, 
surrounding Sugriva exercised with grief and wearing wetted 
cloth. And they all, approaching the mighty-armed R2ma 
of unwearied actions, stationed themselves with folded hands 
like unto the great ascetics around the Grand-Father (of the 
celestials). Thereupon Hanum&n, the son of Marut, resem- 
bling a golden hill and having a countenance resembling 
the rising Sun, spake with folded hands, saying : — “By thy 
assistance, O Kakuthstha, O lord, this great ancestral kingdom 
of the highly powerful monkeys, having sharpened teeth, 




764 



Xl&lrJNA. 



incapable of being acquired by the high-souled ones, hath been 
attained to (by Sugriva). Being commanded by thee, he 
along with his friends, entering this city, shall perform the 
royal duties. And being duly bathed he shall worship thee 
particularly, with garlands, jewels, scents and oshadhis. It 
behoveth thee to enter this pleasant mountain cave and 
satisfy these monkeys by installing (Sugriva on the throne).” 
Being thus accosted by Hanumin, the highly intelligent 
RSghava, skilled in speech and the slayer of foes, replied 
“O gentle Hanum&n, abiding by my Sire’s mandate, I shall 
not enter a hamlet or a city for these fourteen years. Let 
Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, enter this magnificent 
celestial cave and do ye all instal him speedily on the throne.” 
Having thus addressed Hanumlln, RSLma spake unto 
Sugriva, saying : — 1 "Conversant with customs as thou art, 
do thou instal this generous and heroic Angada, gifted with 
prowess and honoring customs, as the heir-apparent of the 
throne. This brave and eldest son of thy elder brother — 
Angada, is truly worthy of the heir-apparentship. O gentle 
one, this month of Sr&bana , which is the first of those four 
months which make up the rainy season, hath set in and this 
is not the time therefore to institute any enquiry about SitS. 
Do thou therefore cuter thy auspicious city and I shall live in 
this mountain along with Lakshmana. Pleasant indeed is 
this mountain cave, spacious, filled wifh air, water and many 
lotuses. Thou shalt engage in endeavours to bring about the 
destruction of R&vana, after Kartika sets in. This is not 
the proper time, O gentle one, and do thou enter thy own 
city. And being installed on the throne do thou enhance the 
joy of thy friends.” Being thus commanded by Rlma, 
Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys entered the pleasant city of 
Kishkindhd, reared by Vdli. Encircling that lord of monkeys 
thousands of them entered the city. Beholding the lord of 
monkeys, the subjects bowed unto him, lowering their heads 
on the ground. Welcoming the subjects and raising them 



i 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



765 



ip, the highly powerful Sugriva entered the pleasant inner 
apartment of his brother. On his entering the city, his friends 
installed the highly powerful foremost of monkeys— Sugriva, 
on the throne like unto the celestials placing the thousand- 
eyed Deity (on the kingdom). The monkeys brought for 
him a copper-colored golden umbrella, white chowries, a 
magnificent golden staff, diverse jewels, various seeds and 
medicating drugs, roots and flowers of glomerous fig 
trees, white clothes, white sandal paste, fragrant garlands, 
flowers growing in water and on land, celestial sandal and 
various scents, fried grain, gold, Priyangu * honey, clari- 
fied butter, curd, tiger-skin, a pair of excellent sandals, 
gorochanaX and red Arsenic . Carrying all those things 

there came sixteen maids, highly delighted. Thereupon 
those monkeys pleased the foremost of twice-born ones 
with jewels clothes and eatables, with a view to instal 
that best of monkeys. And these conversant with mantras 
threw clarified butter, sanctified by mantras , into flaming 
fire burning on a Kuca bed. And placing him on an excellent 
throne facing the east, uttering duly mantrds in that golden 
room situated on the summit of the picturesque palace and 
beautified with magnificent coverlets and garlands, and 
collecting pure water from various rivers, sacred places and 
oceans, those foremost of monkeys kept it in golden jars. 
Gaya, Gabaksha, Gabaya, Sarava, Gandharoadana, Mainda, 
Divida, Hanum&n and J§mbub§n, installed Sugriva with 
auspicious horns of a bull and golden jars according to the 
rites prescribed by Sastras and sanctioned by the great 
saints like unto the celestials installing the thousand eyed 
Deity with pure, fragrant water. Sugriva being installed 



• A medicinal plant, and perfume, commonly known by the name Priyangu 
aad described in tome placet at a fragrant iced. — T. 

t A bright yellow pigment prepared from the urine of a cow, or committed 
So the shape of tribute by the animal, or according to soma found in tbs 

bead of a cow.— T. 





y66 



RAmAFANA. 



thus, these high-souled and foremost of monkeys, by hundreds 
and thousands, began to clatter with delight. Abiding by 
Rama's words, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, embracing 
Angada.conferred on him the heir-apparentship of the throne. 
And Angada being thus installed, those best of monkeys, 
highly delighted, adored the high-souled Sugriva, extolling 
him again and again. Angada and Sugriva being thus 
established, they all, greatly delighted, praised again and 
again the high-souled Rlma and Lakshmana. And the city 
of KishkindhS, filled with stoutly built people and adorned with 
pennons and flags, appeared beautiful in the mountain cave. 
Communicating unto the high-souled R&ma the news of 
installation,the highly powerful lord of monkey hosts (Sugriva) 
getting back his wife Ruma, regained the kingdom like unto 
the lord of celestials. 



SECTION XXVII. 



On Sugriva being installed and the monkeys entering 
the cave, Rama, along with his younger brother, got at the 
Prasrabana hill, resounded with the noise of tigers and deer, 
filled with terrible lions, covered with diverse trees, creepers 
and bowers, inhabited by bears, monkeys, Gopuchyas and 
cats, resembling a collection of clouds and always auspicious. 
R&ma, along with Saumitri, selected for his habitation, a 
spacious cave, situated on the summit of that hill. Making 
the above condition with Sugriva, Rlma, the pure-souled 
descendant of Raghu, spake unto his humble younger brother 
Lakshmana, the enhancer of*wealth,the following sound words, 
worthy of being spoken on that occasion — “O Saumitri, O 
slayer of foes, in this pleasant and spacious mountain cave 
filled with air, we shall pass the rainy season. O son of a king, 
this summit of the hill is excellent and picturesque* beautified 




kishkindhIkAnda m. 



767 



'With white, black and coppery stones, filled with diverse 
metals and river frogs, covered with diverse trees and plea- 
sant creepers, resounded with the musical notes of various 
birds and cries of peacocks and beautified with various 
flowery trees, such as Malati, Kundas^Sindubara^a) Sirisa,(b) 
Kadamba , Arjuna,(c) and Sarja.(d) O son of a king, this 
pond filled with full blown lotuses shall always be near 
our cave. This cave shall be worthy of our habitation, O 
gentle one, having its north-eastern part low and the western 
part high. There is, O Saumitri, at the entrance of the cave, 
a level, beautiful, spacious stone, black like unto collyrium. 
Behold O my brother, on the north, the summit of the hill, 
resembling collyrium and a rising cloud. There appears on 
the south a beautiful white hill resembling the Kaila^a filled 
with various metals. Behold before the cave the mudless 
stream, flowing towards the east like unto Janhavi(e) in the 
Trikutaff) mountain. This rivulet appears like unto a damsel 
ornamented and clothed, being filled with various trees, such 
as — Sandal , Til aka, Sala , Tamalas , Atimuktas/g) Padmaka , 
Saralas,{h) Asokas , Bdneeras } (i) Timidas , Vakulas , Ketakas> 
Hint alas 1 Tinicas, Neepas, Vetashas , Kritamalakas growing 
on her banks. This rivulet resounded with various notes 
of hundreds of various birds, filled with Chakrabakas attached 
to each other, crowded with geese and Sarasas , having 
picturesque banks, and various jewels, is as it were laughing 



(a) As small tree — Vitex negundo. — T. 

(4) A kind of tree — Acacia Sirisa. — T. 

(c) A tree — Pentaptera arjunee. — T. 

(d) The Sala tree (Shorea robusta) another tree (Pentaptera Arjuna. — T. 

(r) The river Ganges — literally~the daughter of Janhu a saint. The Ganges 

is called so on account of her supposed origination from the thigh of the great 
saint. — T. 

(f) The name of a mountain — literally it means — having three peaks. — T. 
(f) A tree (Dalbergia on jeimaisis) — Mountain ebony. — T. 

(A) A sort of pine, (Pinis longifolia) — T. 

(0 A sort of cane or ratan, (Calamas Rotany). — T. 





768 



RlMlrANA. 



on all sides. Here it appears covered with violet lotuses, here 
with red lotuses and there again with celestial white water- 
lilies. This pleasant and picturesque stream is filled with 
various water fowls and Chakravakas and served by many 
a saint. Behold there the rows of pleasant sandal trees 
and those Kukuvas which have grown up as it were like unto 
mental emotion. Picturesque indeed is this place, O slayer 
of foes, and we shall happily live here, O son of SumitrS. 
At no distance, O son of a king, from this place is situate 
the pleasant city of Sugriva — Kishkindhl, filled with forests. 
Hear then, O best of conquerors, the sound of music, and 
the clatter of monkeys mingled with the sound of Mridangas . 
Forsooth is rejoicing Sugriva — the foremost of monkeys, 
getting back his wife, regaining his kingdom, and attaining 
to regal splendour . 11 Having said this, RSLghava, along 
with Lakshmana, dwelt in that Prasravana hill abounding 
in caves and bowers. He did not attain to a best felicity 
although he lived in that pleasant hill filled with many 
things. Pondering over the ravishment of his spouse, dearer 
than his life, beholding the setting of the Sun in particular, 
he did not go to sleep, although he laid himself on the bed 
in the night. His younger brother Lakshmana, equally ag- 
grieved, spoke unto K&kutstha, thus bewailing being exercised 
with grief and almost beside himself with sorrow, consequent 
upon Sit&’s bereavement, saying : — “It doth not behove 
thee to lament thus, being exercised with grief — it is not 
unknown unto thee that people, thus bewailing do exhaust 
themselves by and by. O R&ghava, thou art devoted to 
pious actions and the services of the Deity in this world— 
and pious, energetic and dost believe in the existence of 
God. Without being persevering tbou shalt not be able to 
destroy in conflict thy enemy — that terrible, willy R&kshasa. 
Do thou renounce thy grief and take recourse to energy and 
thou shalt be able to slay that R&kshasa with all his family. 
What of the destruction of Rlvana, thou art O Kikutstha, 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA m. 



769 



capable of uprooting the earth with oceans, forests and hills. 
Rains have set in and do thou wait for the autumn when thou 
shalt encompass the destruction of Ravana with his kingdom 
and kinsmen. I, too, am exciting thy latent energy like unto 
Ore bidden in ashes with oblations. Welcoming the 
auspicious and well-meaning accents of Lakshmana, R&ghava 
again spake unto him - the following affectionate words : — 
“O Lakshmana, truly do thy words become thee, affectionate, 
devoted, truthful and intent on my welfare as thou art. 
Renouncing this grief standing in the way of all business, 
I shall call forth, the more, this my energy on the occasion 
of displaying my prowess. I shall live here, awaiting the 
autumn and abiding by thy words and awaiting as well 
Sugriva’s pleasure and the clear currents of the rivers. 
Heroes receiving favours always return them ; the ungrateful 
lose the friendship of the honest.” Considering R§ma’s words 
as highly sound and welcoming them therefore, Lakshmana, 
with folded hands, spake unto -Rama of graceful appearance, 
displaying his own intelligence — ”0 lord of men, I fully 
approve of all thou hast said. The monkey-chief shall soon 
engage in our service. Resolved on the destruction of thy 
enemy, do thou spend here this rainy season awaiting the 
autumn. Subduing thy wrath, and awaiting the autumn, do 
thou with me spend these four months in this hill filled with 
deer, capable as thou art of encompassing the destruction of 
thy enemy.” 



SECTION xxvili. 



Thereupon encompassing the destruction of Vali, install- 
ing Sugriva and dwelling on the summit of the M&lyabana 
hill, R£ma spake unto Lakshmana, saying, “This is the time 
—the beginning of the rainy season — do thou behold the sky 

97 




77 © 



RltolrANA. 



enveloped with clouds resembling so many hills. The sky, 
drinking the liquid contents of the ocean through the rays of 
the Sun, and being enceinte for nine months, is giving birth 
to showers. Ascending the sky by the steps of clouds, one 
can ornament the Sun with garlands of Kutajas and Arjunas . 
Like unto a wound covered with a torn cloth, the sky is 
enveloped with cool clouds, coppery with the rays of the 
setting Sun, and yellow at another end. The sky, having 
mild breezes as its breath, sprinkled with sandal-like evening 
rays and covered with yellow clouds, is appearing as it were 
like one stricken with amour . The earth, afflicted with pers- 
piration and filled with new water, is emitting forth vapour 
like unto Sit£ racked with sorrow. Ketaka smelling breezes 
may be drunk up in the cavity formed by putting the 
hands together, like unto cold water discharged off the 
clouds and mixed with camphor. This hill, having blown 
Arjunas and Ketakas and rii of its enemies like unto 
Sugriva, hath been bathed with showers. These hillocks, 
having clouds for dark deer-skins, heavy showers for sacred 
threads and having caves filled with air, are appearing like so 
many Brahmins who have finished their studies. The sky, 
being struck by thunders like unto so many golden lashes, 
is, as if, groaning under a deep mental agony. Methinks, the 
lightning, shining by the violet clouds, is appearing like unto 
the poor Vaidehi at the lap of R&vana. These quarters, 
enveloped with clouds and having therefore the Moon and 
stars hidden, are indeed very pleasant unto those who are 
under the influence of Cupid. Behold, O Saumitri, on the 
summits of the hill the flowery Kutajas enveloped with the 
vapour arising out of the earth, gladdened at the approach 
of the rainy season and exciting my amour who am stricken 
with grief. (In this season) the dust is watered, the air is 
saturated with dews, all the evils of the summer are stopped, 
the kings no longer proceed on royal marches and those 
journeying in a foreign land return their native homes. The 




KISHK1N DHlKXNDA M. 



77 1 



Ckakrab&kas along with their mates are proceeding, being 
desirous to live in the Mdnasa Saravara ; and in consequence 
of incessant rains, chariots and other conveyances cannot 
pass along the wayfares. Somewhere hidden, somehere open, 
the sky, covered with clouds, appears like a vast ocean, being 
encircled here and there with hills. There speedily pass 
by the hill streams, being resounded with the cries of peacocks, 
carrying with the current Sarja and Kadamva flowers and 
having their coppery content* mixed with the metals of 
the mountain. People (in this season)live upon many a sweet 
rose-apple ; and ripe mangoes, of diverse colors, being shaken 
by the wind, fall on the earth. The clouds, resembling the 
summits of a mountain, having lightnings for pennons and 
cranes for garlands, are muttering like unto infuriated 
elephants in a field of battle. The forest-lands, having their 
green pastures emerged in water, with peacocks dancing all 
around with joy and clouds discharging their watery volumes 
incessantly, are appearing more graceful in the evening. 
(In this season) clouds, surrounded by cranes and heavily 
laden with water, are constantly moving, sometimes resting 
on the high summits of the mountains and emitting a mutter- 
ing sound. And rows of cranes, fond of clouds, rising 
up in the sky, delighted and moved by the wind, are appear- 
ing like a garland of white lotuses, spread along the welkin. 
And the earth, covered with green grass and variegated 
with newly bom insects, is appearing like a damsel clothed 
with a white blanket spotted here and there with lac. 
(In this part of the year) sleep is gradually overcoming the 
great God N&riyana, the river is flowing speedily towards 
the ocean, the delghted cranes are approaching the clouds 
and the damsels are proceeding towards their lovers. The 
peacocks are dancing at the forest skirts, the Kadamva trees 
are covered with flowers, the bulls have become attached 
unto kine and the earth has become charming with corns and 
forests. The rivers are flowing by ; the clouds are discharg- 




77 * 



RlMlVANA. 



ing waters ; the infuriated elephants are emitting terrible 
roars ; the forest-lands are growing more charming ; persons, 
separated from their wives, are growing more anxious ; the 
peacocks are dancing with delight and the monkeys are 
greatly comforted for Sugriva’s attaining to the kingdom. 
By the fountains in the forests, the infuriated elephants 
delighted with the fragrance of the Ketaka flowers and mad- 
dened with the noise of the water falls, are emitting terrible 
roars along with the peacocks. The black bees, resorting to 
the branches of the Kadamba trees and overwhelmed with 
showers, are, as if, slowly discharging their temporal juice — 
namely the honey of flowers collected by them ere while. 
The branches of rose-apple trees containing enough of fruits 
like unto a collection of char coal are so appearing as if the 
black bees are drinking the juice thereof. The dense clouds, 
ornamented with pennon-like lightnings and emitting terrible 
roars, are appearing like so many elephants, mad after fighting. 
The infuriated lord of elephants, following in the track and 
ranging in the hills and forests, hearing the muttering of clouds 
and taking it for the uproar of another elephant, has turned 
back, with a view to enter into conflict with him. Somewhere 
the bees are humming, somewhere the peacocks are dancing 
— somewhere are ranging the infuriated elephants — and in 
this way the forest-land has assumed diverse appearances. 
It appears like unto a drinking-place, covered with Kadambas, 
Sarjas, Arjunas and lotuses growing on land, filled with 
water resembling honey and with the dance and cries 
of mad peacocks. The birds, having their wings discolored, 
being wet with water, delighted and thirsty, are drinking the 
drops of clear water falling on leaves and discharged by the 
Lord of celestials.* The sonorous humming of the bees, being 
accompanied by the gutteral sound of the frogs and the 
mutterings of the clouds, resembling the sound of Mridangas, 
an organised music, as if, hath begun in the forest. Sometimes 

* According to Hindu mythology Indr* is the god of rains. — T. 




KISH KIND Hi KIND A M. 



773 



dancing, sometimes setting up loud cries, sometimes placing 
themselves against the tops of the trees, the peacocks, having 
beautifully ornamented exteriors, have commenced music 
in the forest. And rising from their perpetual sleep by the 
muttering of clouds, the frogs, assuming various shapes and 
making diverse sounds, are setting up cries being distressed 
with new watery showers. The rivers, carrying Chakrabdkas 
as their breast and leaving behind their old banks, are approach- 
ing, being excited, their own lord with various new presents. 
Clouds, big with new waters coming in contact with violet 
ones are appearing as such ; and sometimes, touching the 
hills burnt by forest-fire, are appearing like deep-rooted 
hills. The elephants are ranging in this charming forest- 
land, carrying the fragrance of Necpas and Arjunas , having 
its green swards filled with Indragopas * and with delighted, 
peacocks dancing all around. The black bees, delighted, 

I are drinking honey, embracing the shower-distressed and new 
filaments of the lotuses and Kada?nva flowers. (In this 
season) the elephants are infuriated, the bulls are delighted, 
the lions have grown more powerful, the hills are charming — 
the kings are devoid of all active pursuits, and the Lord 
of celestials is engaged in sport with clouds. The clouds 
ranging in the welkin and discharging heavy showers, are 
roaring like unto ocean ; and the rivers, ponds and pools are 
deluging the earth with their watery contents. (In this 

season) heavy showers set in — the wind blovveth mightily and 
the rivers breaking down their banks flow quickly blockading 
the wayfares. The mountains are, as if, displaying their own 
beauty and grace being as it were bathed by the cloud-like 
jars, conferred by the lord of celestials and brought by the 
wind like unto a king sprinkled by men. The sky is enveloped 
with clouds and neither the sun nor the stars can be seen — 
the earth is satisfied with new showers — and the quarters 
being covered with darkness cannot be seen. The high 

* An insect (Coccinella of various kinds). — T. 



774 



rJjiIfjxj. 



summits, of the mountains, being washed by showers anc^ 
beautified by far-stretching waterfalls resembling pearls, ar^ 
appearing more graceful. The heavy mountain waterfalls^ 
losening the rocks and stretching over the caves filled with, 
the cries of peacocks, are appearing like a pearl-necklace. 
And the quick streaming waterfalls, of the mountains, wash- 
ing the summits of the hills, and resembling the pearls, are 
being deposited in the cave at the foot And watery drops 
resembling the pearls of the necklaces used by celestial 
damsels are pouring on all sides. The setting of the Sun is 
announced by the birds taking to their nests, lotuses growing 
pale and M Hat is blossoming. The royal marches are all stop- 
ped, and the soldiers, who have already marched are waiting in 
the way — hostility and wayfares have been equally blockaded 
by water. This month of Bhddra is the time of study- 
ing for those Brahmins, who chant Sima Vedas. Having 
roofed all his houses and stored up his food, Bharata, the 
king of Ko^ala hath set upon the performance of Ashara 
sacrifices. The river Saraju is now brimful with water. 
Seeing me return as if AyodhySL herself is making a delightful 
noise. Clearly manifest are now all the signs of the rainy 
season and Sugriva, rid of his enemies, established on the 
vast kingdom, and regaining his wives, hath attained to best 
felicity. And I am, O Lakshmana,waning everyday like unto 
the banks of a river, being separated from my spouse and 
deprived of my vast kingdom. Immense is my grief, in- 
accessible is this rainy season and mighty is my enemy, 
R&vana ; methinks it is impossible for me to bring about 
the discomfiture of my foe. Owing to the unfitness of the 
season (for marching against my foe) and the wayfares being 
inacessible, I cannot possibly request Sugriva (to march) 
although he is prepared to abide by my mandate. Moreover 
after a good deal of affliction he has regained his wives, 
and my service is of very great difficulty ; so I do not wish 
to request that monkey-chief now. Forsooth, shall Sugriva 




KISHKlNDHlKlNDAM. 



77 5 



think of the benefits (he has received from me) after enjoying 
rest for sometime, when the time for action shall arrive. 
Therefore I shall, O Lakshmana, live here, awaiting the 
pleasure of Sugriva and the clear currents of the rivers (the 
autumn). Heroes receiving benefits, do always return them. 
The ungrateful lose the good wishes of the great ones.” Being 
thus accosted, Lakshmana, with folded hands, respecting 
highly bis words, spake unto the graceful R&ma, pointing 
out his own welfare. “Forsooth shall that lord of monkeys 
carry out all thy wishes. Do thou therefore spend here the 
rainy season, awaiting the autumn.” 



SECTION XXI X. 



Beholding the clear welkin, void of clouds and light- 
nings, filled with Sarasas and sprinkled with the charming rays 
of the Moon, HanumSLn, the son of Marut, versed in religious 
lore and political economy, and conversant with effects proper 
to the time or season, approaching the Lord of monkeys, 
addressed him with various sound, reasonable and pleasant 
words, well-meaning, true and teaching the; means of 
acquiring forgiveness, piety and wealth. Acquiring riches 
Sugriva hath grown careless for the collection of righteous- 
ness and wealth, is following the track of the vicious, and is 
addicted to the satisfaction of sensual appetites — having all his 
actions stopped and desires attained — and given to enjoyments 
with damsels. Having attained all his desires and wishes, 
his own wife and the much-desired-for TSra, Sugriva is 
sporting with them, day and night, without any affliction, like 
unto the Lord of celestials with Gandharbas and Apsaras. 
Placing all the royal affairs at the hands of the counsellors, 
without looking to them, and confiding fully in their abilities 



776 



HA MAY ANA. 



lie is living like one under the influence of passions — “Tbou 
hast attained thy kingdom, fame, and thy vast ancestral 
wealth. It now behoveth thee to perform thy duties by thy 
friends. Truly doth his kingdom, fame and prowess increase 
who is cognizant of the seasonableness of time and doth 
good to his friends. O king, truly doth he attain to a vast 
kingdom, who hath the same wealth, soldiery and body with 
his friends. It becometh thee, therefore, who art crowned with 
a good character, and who dost wend a blameless track, to 
work out thy friend’s well-being (as promised by thee). H^> 
who doth not engage in the service of his friends renouncin ££ 
all business, becometh void of all energy and involved 
unnecessary troubles. And he, who engageth in his friend*' - 
service after the proper season is over, does nothing to hi - 
well-being, though he performs a great thing. O slayer 
foes, soon shall the time for performing thy friend’s service, b 
over ; do thou therefore encompass Raghava’s good, namel^S 
the searching out of Vaidehi. O king, Rlma, conversan 
with the seasonableness of time and wise as he is, is no0* 
informing thee of it, though the proper time is past ; an<^ 
though he is in hurry, he is waiting for thee. R&ghava 
as well as Lakshmana, who are the instruments of thy attain — 
ing to this vast kingdom, and thy friends for so lon^ 
a time, are persons of incomparable prowess by virtue rflE 
their unequalled accomplishments. He hath already per- 
formed thy service, and it behoveth thee now, O lord 
of monkeys, to command the foremost of monkeys to engage 
in his service. To engage, out of season, in a service, uncalled 
for, is not blameable ; but to defer the performance of an 
action in proper time after promising is indeed an object of 
censure. O lord of monkeys, thou dost engage even in the 
service of one who doth thee no good, then why shalt thou 
not engage in the benefit of R£ma who hath favoured thee 
by encompassing the destruction (of V&li) and securing for thee 
thy kingdom ? O lord of monkeys and bears, truly thou art 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



Ill 

gifted with prowess and strength, why dost thou not prepare 
thyself for satisfying Da^arathee’s commands ? Da^arathee 
himself is capable of subduing the celestials, Asuras and great 
serpents — he is simply awaiting the fulfilment of thy promise. 
He hath performed a great service at the risk of his life — we 
shall therefore find out Vaidehi whether she is in this earth 
or in the welkin. Even the celestials, Danavas, Gandharbas, 
Asuras, Marutas, Yakshas are afraid of him in the battle- 
field — what of the insignificant Rakshasas. O lord of 
i monkeys, it therefore behoveth thee to do good by all 
means unto the powerful Rama, who benefitted thee before. 
Olord of monkeys, who is there amongst us, who shall 
not at thy command proceed unto water, sky or the region 
Under the earth? O blameless one, there are more than 
one koti of invincible monkeys under thee, do thou com- 
mand, who shall proceed and to what quarter ?” Hearing 
*liese words of HanumHn, said on a very proper occasion, 
tlie intelligent Sugriva, made up his mind for a worthy 
Ond. Thereupon the highly intelligent Sugriva ordered 
ever active Neela, to collect soldiers from various 
Quarters. “Do thou so arrange as all my hosts and soldiers 
With their commanders soon come here. Do thou soon bring 
hcire at my behest all the energetic and quick-coursing 
donkeys and commanders spreading their conquests to the 
e nd of the earth. (After their arrival) do thou thyself 
I inspect and count all those monkeys. He who shall not 
1 reach here within fifteen days shall be punished with the loss 
\ of his life. There is no need of scrutinizing my orders. 

] Abiding by my order, do thou see along with Angada all 

/ the elderly monkeys.” Having thus arranged, that best of 
monkeys entered the inner apartment. 




773 



rAmAfana. 



SECTION XXX. 



Sugriva having entered his palace, and the sky being 
cleared of the clouds, R5ma, racked with grief, passing the 
rainy season and beholding the yellow welkin, the clear disc 
of the Moon, the autumnal night sprinkled with the rays of 
the Moon, the a mo u ^stricken lord of monkeys, the 
ravishment of the daughter of Janaka, and the season 
well-nigh expired, became overwhelmed with sorrow and 
senseless. And regaining his sense after sometime, the 
highly intelligent king — Raghava began to think of Vaidebi 
although always present in his mind. And beholding 
the clear sky void of lightnings and clouds and filled with 
the noise of Sdrasas , Raghava began to lament piteously> ! 
stationing himself on the summit of the hill ornamented with j 
metals of golden hue. And beholding the autumnal sky : 
he engaged in the meditation of his beloved spouse. How ! 
shall that Sa rasa-voiced damsel be pleased to-day, who, while 
sporting in the hermitage, used to warble like Sdrasas, to 
invite them. Beholding Asana trees, as if covered with golden 
flowers and not beholding me how shall that damsel be 
pleased? How that exquisitely fine damsel having a sweet 
voice shall be pleased to-day, who used formerly to awake 
at the sounds of the drakes ? Hearing the noise of her 
companions — Chakrabakas , how shall that one, of expan- 
sive eyes resembling lotuses, live ? Without her having the 
eyes of a fawn, I do not attain to felicity to-day, ranging at 
large by ponds, streams, pools and in forests and woods. For- 
sooth shall Cupid excited by the approach of the autumn, 
distress her the more on account of my separation and her 
personal charms.” Thus bewailed that best son of a king like 
unto the bird Sdranga soliciting water from the lord of celes- 
tials. And the graceful Lakshmana, returning from the pic- 




KISHKlNDHlKlJSlDA M. 



779 



turesque mountain-summits where he had sojourned in quest 
of fruits, beheld his elder brother. And beholding in that 
lonely forest his brother, racked with anxious thoughts hard to 
bear and almost beside himself (with grief) the high-minded 
Saumitri, prompted by his brother’s grief, spoke unto him 
very poorly, saying:— “O worshipful one, what hast thou 
perpetrated by placing thyself under the control of passions 
and defeating thy manliness ? Thy deep and devout medita- 
tion hath been purloined by thy grief $ and it is by religious 
contemplation that thy grief shall be terminated now. O 
brother, after going through the ceremonies of bathing and 
so forth, and acquiring peace, do thou bring all thy time 
under thy control by virtue of the concentration of soul ; and 
being of unmitigated strength do thou resort to power and 
help, the key-notes for the accomplishment of thy great object. 
O lord of men, jSnaki, husbanded by thee, is not capable of 
being easily possessed by others. O hero who getting at a 
flame of fire, doth not burn himself ?” Thereupon Rlma 
spoke unto Lakshmana, gifted with royal marks, address- 
ing him with natural and resolute words and saying : — 
“What thou hast said, is sound, well-meaning, sanctioned by 
polity and speaks of piety, wealth and forgiveness. It 
should therefore, without the least doubt, be performed by me. 
It behoveth me to engage in contemplation about the eternal 
truth regarding the Deity and in ascetic observances. Or 
else O Prince, it is not proper to think of the fruits of a 
difficult, highly developed and energetic action.” Thereupon 
thinking of Maithelee, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, 
Rlma spoke unto Lakshmana with a dried countenance. 
“Having satisfied the earth with a profuse discharge of 
water, produced crops and thus, finished his work, the 
thousand eyed Deity is sitting silent. O son of a king, 
the clouds, muttering a long and deep sound and approaching 
the hills and trees, are calmed having discharged their liquid 
contents. Having made the ten quarters dark blue, the 




kAmAkana. 



7S0 

clouds, resembling blue lotuses, have become calm, like unto 
elephants without temporal juice. O gentle one, high gales 
accompanied with rains, big with water and fragrant with 
Kutaja and Arjuna flowers being driven before hither 
and thither, have now become silent. O innocent Laksh- 
mana, the sounds of clouds, elephants, peacocks, and 
fountains, have been all stopped. Hills, having variegated 
summits, being washed by dense clouds and thus free from 
dirt and impurities, do appear elegant b^ing sprinkled bj 
the rays of the Moon. Forsooth hath the autumn set in, 
dividing its grace in the branches of Sapiachada trees, in 
the rays of the Sun and Moon with stars and in the gaits of 
the excellent elephants. Surely hath the autumnal grace 
resorted to many things. And it hath appeared more 
profusely in the lotuses blossomed by the first rays of the Sun. 
Scented sweet with the flower of Saptackada trees, borowing 
the musical notes of bees, following the wind and subduing 
the pride of infuriated elephants, the autumn is appearing 
very elegant. The swans are playing with Chakrabatas 
having splendidly spacious wings, fond of cupid, crusted with 
the filaments of lotuses, and arriving at the banks of the 
rivers. The antumnal grace is appearing more elegant 
being divided in infuriated elephants, in proud kine, and in 
streams of clear currents. Deholding the sky divested of 
clouds, without manifesting the beauty of their tail? 
and renouncing their attachment unto their beloved 
mates, amusements and beauty, the peacocks are as if ad 
engaged in meditation in the forest. The forest-lands 
arc as if a-blaze with many a sweet-scented picturesque 
Priyaka trees, having a golden hue and their tops low- 
ered down with the weight of flowers. The gaits, of 
the elephants rendered idle with a profuse discharge 
of temporal juice, fond of forests and water lilies, smell* 
ing the fragrance of the flowers of Saptachhada trees 
and accompanied by their mates, have become slow. The 




KISH KIN DHlKlN DAM. 781 

sky is clear like unto a sword — the streams have become 
of feeble currents — the wind, cool and scented with the fra- 
grance of white esculent w r aterlilies, is blowing — and quarters 
have become devoid of darkness. The mud has been 
dried up by the rays of the Sun and the earth is filled 
with dust — this is the time for preparation for inimical 
kings (to enter into conflict). The bulls, having their 
beauty enhanced by the autumn, and their body covered 
with dust, delighted, infuriated and hence desirous of 
entering into skirmish, have been setting up terrible 
roars in the midst of kine. The she-elephants, moving 
slowly, fond, passionate ani accompanied by other members, 
have been following their passionate mates, in the forest, 
embracing them. Leaving behind their excellent orna- 
ments — the tails, the peacocks, getting at the banks of the 
rivers, have been going away poorly and with depressed 
hearts as if being remonstrated with by the Sdrasas . Having 
terrified the Karandavas and Chakrabakas with their mighty 
roars, the elephants, having cleft trunks and being agitated 
again and again, have been drinking water in the ponds 
filled with full blown lotuses. The drakes have been jumping 
delightedly into the rivers, mudless, covered with sands, full 
of clear water, filled with kine and resounded with the notes 
of Sdrasas. Now hath stopped the noise of rivers, clouds, 
fountains, water, the high winds, the peacocks and the 
mirthless frogs. And venomous snakes of vareiagated colors, 
having lived for a pretty long time during the rains 
without food, have on the approach of the autumn, come 
out of their dens, hungry, in quest of their prey. The 
red-dyed evening hath renounced the welkin, being de- 
lighted at the touch of the rays of the Moon and opening 
a little her eyes — the stars. Having the rising Moon for 
her elegant countenance, the stars for her excellent 
open eyes and the rays for a piece of white garment, 
the night appeareth like a damsel wearing a white cloth 




782 



Rld.1V AN A. 



Having fed on ripe white rice, the excellent rows of 
delighted Sd rasas are flying quickly up to the sky like unto 
a well-strung garland shaken by the wind. The water, of the 
lake filled with sleeping drakes and water lilies, is appearing 
like the sky in the night, devoid of clouds and filled with 
the Full Moon and stars. The ponds, having the drakes 
scattering hither and thither for their girdles and 
engarlanded with full blown lotuses and water lilies, are 
appearing like so many damsels ornamented with diverse 
ornaments. The sound set up by the wind in the dawn 
like unto that of a pipe accompanied by the music of a 
trumpet, being mixed with the noise of the caves and 
bulls are as if multiplying each other. The banks of 
the rivers are being dressed by the newly blossomed 
flowers shaken by the mild breezes and Kdfas like unto clean, 
washed silken clothes. The black bees, bold, given to drin- 
king honey, rendered yellow with the filaments of lotuses 
and A sana flowers, delighted and accompanied by their mates 
arc following the w’ind in the forest. The clear water, the 
blossoming flowers, the noise of Craunclias> the ripe 
white rice, the mild breezes, the clear Moon announce 
the approach, of the Autumn — the removers of the rains. The 
rivers, having fishes for their girdles, have become of 
slackened course like unto damsels moving slowly in the dawn 
being enjoyed by their husbands. The mouths of the rivers, 
filled with Chakrab&kaSy covered with aquatic plants and 
clothed with Kdgas are appearing like unto the countenances 
of damsels pasted with yellow pigments. The most powerful 
Cupid hath taken up his terrible bow in this forest filled with 
Asatta flowers appearing like unto arrows and the hum of 
delighted bees. Having satisfied the people with a profuse dis- 
charge of water, filled the rivers and pools and covered the 
earth with crops, the clouds have disappeared renouncing the 
sky. The rivers in this season of autumn have been gradually 
showing their banks. O thou of excellent looks, the ponds x in 




KISH KIN DHlKA ND A M. 



783 



this season) appear exquisitely fine, being filled with Kurara 
birds and Chakrabdkas . O son of king, this is the time of 
preparation for inimical kings, desirous of defeating one 
another. O son of a king, this is the best time for royal 
marches, but I do not find Sugriva preparing himself for that 
end. There appear on the summits of the hills flowers 
Asanas , SaptaparnaSyKaviddraStBandhugeebas^ni Tamalas . 

1 Behold, O Lakshmana, the banks of the rivers filled with 
swans, Sdrasas , Chakrabdkas and Kuraras. Stricken as 
I am with grief, these four months, the season of rains, 
appeared unto me like a hundred year, not beholding Sita. 

1 Like unto Chakrabdkas following their mates, Sita, taking 
the terrible forest of Dandaka for a picturesque garden, used 
to follow me there. O Lakshmana, Sugriva, is not inclined 
to show any commiseration* towards me, who am separated 
from my beloved spouse, deprived of my kingdom, banished 
and striken with sorrow. Regarding me as one without any 
to back him, deprived of his kingdom, insulted by Ravana, 
wretched, of a distant land, under the influence of amour and 
therefore seeking his help, (Sugriva hath not felt pity 
for me). O subduer of foes, O thou of excellent looks, for 
these reasons, I have been insulted by that vicious-souled 

• king of monkeys — Sugriva. Having appointed the time to 
institute enquiries about Sita, that wicked-minded one hath 
now forgot it on the accession of his new dignity. Do thou 
therefore repair to Kishkindha and speak of me unto that 
stupid lord of monkeys — Sugriva, addicted to rural enjoy- 
ments. And do thou tell him — ‘He, who breaks his promise 
made unto a powerful benefactor who solicits his favour, is 
regarded by people as vile. He is a true hero and an 
excellent person who verifies his words whether good or bad. 
Ungrateful they are who do not, after attaining their ends, 
engage in the service of those of their friends who have not 
accomplished their objects ; even those living on raw flesh 
do not feed on their gore after their death. And ask him if 




RAM AY ANA. 



7§ [ 

he wishes to behold in battle-field the golden bow resembling I 
a lightning. And ask him more, if he wishes to hear the I 
terrible twang of my bow reseipbling the noise of thunder, l 
when I am enraged in battle. O hero, O son of a king, when | 
apprised of my prowess assisted by thee, will he not recap'' 
tulate in his mind (that he may be destroyed by us like unto 
Vali) ? O conqueror of enemies’ cities, does not that lord 
monkeys, after accomplishing his object, think of the conditiof* 5 
under which our friendship was contracted? Does not th^* 1 
lord of monkeys think that he has spent four months i r 
enjoyments, having promised and appointed the season, afte^ 
rains, (for making) enquiries about SitSL ? Does not Sugriir - 
feel pity for us, who are racked with sorrow, being addictec^ 
to drinking with friends and counsellors? Do thou go, 
hero, O thou of mighty strength and relate unto Sugriv;^ 
these my angry words. ‘O Sugriva, do not neglect thy-'* 
promise and wend the way trodden by Vali. I killed Vali - 
only with my shaft in the battle-field ; but if thou dost deviate 
from the path of truth I shall destroy thee along with thy 
kinsmen and relatives.’ O thoQ best of men, do thou speedily 
relate unto him all those benefits which we shall reap by his 
actions, for the proper season is well-nigh past. O best of 
monkeys, do thou carry out thy promise remembering the 
eternal existence of virtue. Do thou not behold the spirit 
of Vali in the abode of Death, being killed by the shaft 
discharged by me.” Beholding his elder brother thus enraged 
and bewailing, the fiery-spirited Lakshmana, the best of men, 
became enraged with Sugriva. 




KISHKlNDHlKlNDA M. 785 

SECTION XXXI. 

XjAKSHMANA again addressed his high-minded elder 
brother, the son of a king, influenced by passion, stricken 
'With grief, and poorly, with the following words. “That 
monkey shall not follow the actions of the pious, shall not 
think of the great fruit (the accession of kingdom) reaped 
fcy our friendship ; he shall not enjoy the riches of the 
monkey-kingdom because he has not the right understanding 
to make good his promise. Owing to the wane of his under- 
standing in consequence of thy favour he is addicted to rural 
enjoyments and hath forgot to return thy benefits. O hero, 
Icilled let him espy his elder brother Vali. It is not proper 
to confer kingdom upon that wicked-minded one. I am 
Enable to bear the outburst of my ire — forsooth shall I 
Icill to-day — that liar Sugriva. May the son of Vali with other 
principal monkeys engage in quest of that daughter 
a kin g.” Beholding him rise up from the seat with 
l>ow in his hand and greatly wrought up with anger and 
^caring him thus announce his intention about the destruction 
°f Sugriva, R 5 ma, the slayer of foes, spake unto him the 
following humble words worthy of being spoken on that 




°ccasion. “Persons like thee on this earth do not perpetrate 
crime of destroying their friends. He is truly a great 
^€ro and an excellent person who subdues anger by his 
*ight understanding, O Lakshmana, it is not proper for thee 
*0 bring about the destruction of thy friend ; do thou 
, follow thy former friendship and good feelings. Avoiding 
harsh words do thou address Sugriva, who has violated 
bis promise, with soothing words.” Being thus duly coun- 
selled by his elder brother, that best of men, the heroic Laksh- 
mana — the slayer of foes, entered the city. Thereupon 
the highly intelligent Lakshmana of right understanding, 



99 




786 



RlXlYANA . 



and ever intent upon the welfare of his brother 9 taking up ' 
a bow like unto Indra’s, resembling the summit of a hill 
and terrible as Death himself, entered, wrought up with ire, the 
abode of the king of monkeys like the hill MandSra. Intelli- 
gent like Vrihaspati and ever abiding by his elder brother’s 
behest, Lakshmana, revolving in his mind wbat he should 
say as well as Sugriva’s answers, and enveloped with the 
fire of anger arising from the excitement of his brother’s 
amour , and therefore displeased, proceeded quick as ai*- 
And on he proceeded, felling down by his velocity, Sa/&> 
Tdla> and Asvakarna trees, throwing aside the mounta» n 
summits and other trees, breaking rocks into pieces wi*-' 1 
his feet and striding very quickly like unto a fleet-coursir* 1 
elephant. And that best of Ikshwakus, beheld that splend ^ 
city of the king of monkeys, hard to enter, surrounded 
monkey-herds, and mountains. And having his lips swollen 
with anger for Sugriva, Lakshmana beheld the terrib^ 
monkeys walking outside the city. Beholding that best 
men — Lakshmana, the monkeys resembling elephants entered 
the mountainous stronghold and took up the summits of th 
hill and huge trees. And observing them armed, Lakshmana 
was doubly inflamed with anger like unto fire kindled witf 
fuels. And beholding Lakshmana, highly enraged, terrible 
as Death himself at the time of dissolution, the monkeys^ 
stricken with fear, fled away, by hundreds, into various quar - 
ters. Thereat those foremost of monkeys, entering the^ 
palace of Sugriva, communicated unto him, Lakshmana’s ircr* 
and approach. That amorous chief of monkeys, attached 
unto Tara, paid no heed to the words of those foremost of 
monkeys. Thereupon those terrible monkeys, resembling 
hills, elephants and clouds, went out of the city being com- 
manded by the minister. Some of them had sharpened 
teeth and nails, some were grim-visaged, some had teeth 
like those of tigers, some had the strength of ten elephants, 
omc had the strength of hundred elephants and some 




KISHKlNDHlKlNDA M. 787 

had that of thousand elephants. Thereupon Lakshmana, 
angry, espied the city of Kishkindhd l hard to enter and 
surrounded by mighty monkeys with trees in their 
hands. And getting over the ditch around the city walls, 
those terrible-looking monkeys stationed themselves openly. 
And meditating upon Sugriva’s error and his brother’s 
interest, the self-controlled Lakshmana, heroic, proceeded 
onwards. Sighing hot and hard, that best of men — Lakshmana, 
with reddened eyes appeared like unto smoky fire. He 
appeared like unto a terrible serpent of five mouths, having the 
top of the arow for his tongue, the bow for his expanded hood 
and his own prowess for the poison. Beholding him like the 
flaming fire of dissolution and enraged lord of serpents, 
Angada, out of fear, became exceedingly sorry. Thereupon 
the far-famed Lakshmana, having his eyes reddened with 
ire, spoke unto Angada, saying” — O child, do thou inform 
Sugriva of my arrival. O conqueror of foes, do thou tell him : — 
c lakshmana, the younger brother of Rama, being stricken 
'With grief on account of his brother’s disaster, hath come 
to thee and is waiting at the gate. If it pleaseth thee, do 
thou make good thy promise.* Saying these words do thou 
speedily return, O my child, O conqueror of foes.” Hearing 
iakshmana’s words, Angada, overwhelmed with grief, aproa- 
<^hing his uncle said — ‘Saumitree hath arrived here.* Being 
greatly agitated with harsh words, Angada, with a pale and 
poorly countenance issued out speedily and approaching, touch- 
ed first the king’s feet and afterwards with reverence Rump’s 
feet. That one of exceeding prowess first touched the feet 
of his uncle then saluted again his mother and afterwards 
touching the feet of Ruma related unto them every thing 
in full. That monkey, possessed by amour and under 
the influence of liquor, being asleep could not hear (what 
Augada had said). Beholding Lakshmana highly enraged, the 
monkeys, possessed by fear, began to make noise as they 
were welccming him. They, approaching Lakshmana bfegan to 





788 



RAmIFANA 



set up a terrible roar like unto thunder and resembling 
rthc uproar^fof lions and the noise of water-falls. By that 
terrible sound awoke that monkey-chief, having coppery 
eyes, agitated, ’"adorned with garlands and possessed by 
liquor. HearingThe words of Angada, the two counsellors of 
Sugriva, intelligent and of magnificent looks, along with him, 
approached that lord of monkeys. And those two ministers 
Yaksha and Pravaba , to give him proper counsels, informed 
'that monkey-chief) of the arrival of Lakshmana. Satisfying 
Sugriva with words pointing out his welfare, they sitting by 
him, spake unto that lord of wind resembling the king of 
celestials, saying : — “Of those two great and truthful brothers 
Rama and Lakshmana, who are born as men, worthy 9f attain- 
ing to kingdom and who have gained for thee thy kingdom, 
Lakshmana, with a bow in his hand, is waiting at thy gate. 
And afraid of whom, the monkeys, trembling, are setting up 
terrible roars. That Lakshmana, Raghava’s brother, having 
words for his charioteer, and perseverance for his chariot, 
hath approached thee at his brother’s command. O blame- 
less king, by that Lakshmana — Tara’s darling, Angada 
l ath been despatched unto thee. O king, of monkeys, 
that highly powerful one, having his eyes full of ire, is wait- 
ing at thy gate, as if burning down with his eyes all the 
monkeys. O king, along with thy children and friends do thou 
repair unto him speedily and bowing unto him with thy 
head down do thou pacify his wrath. And do thou, O king, 
with a composed heart, perform what the virtuous-souled 
Rama hath ordered thee to do and thus fulfil thy promise. 




kishkindhAkAnda m. 



789 



SECTION xxxii. 



TT EARING the words of Angada as well as of Lakshmana’s 
wrath, the self-controlled Sugriva along with his counsellors, 
left his seat. Ascertaining the weight and lightness of the 
present occasion, that one, expert in counsels and abiding 
by their advice spake unto the expert counsellors, saying : — “I 
have not done him any wrong, nor have I spoken unto him any 
improper word. I do not know why RSghaya’s brother Laksh- 
mana hath become offended with me. Lakshmana hath been 
falsely apprised of my imaginary weakness by my enemies, 
always looking to my dark sides. It behoveth ye all, to ascertain 
now speedily according to your knowledge and right under- 
standing (the cause of Lakshmana* s wrath). I do not fear 
Lakshmana or Raghava ; but friends enraged without any 
cause do invariably produce fear. It is easy to contract 
friendship but very difficult to sustain it ; for owing to the 
fickleness of our minds, a very slight cause brings about 
separation. I have not done him any good proportionate to 
what the high-souled Rama had done for me \ and it is for 
this reason that I am afraid of him." Being thus addressed 
by Sugriva — Hanuman, the foremost of monkey-counsellors, 
spoke, according to his own understanding, saying : — “It is 
no wonder, O lord of monkeys, that thou hast not forgot 
the unexpected benefit, (thou hadst received at the hands of 
Rama). To encompass thy well-being, Vali, powerful as the 
Lord of celestials, was fearlessly destroyed by the heroic 
RSghava. There is not the least doubt, that Raghava, out of 
love, is enraged with thee, and hath despatched his younger 
brother Lakshmana, the enhancer of prosperity. O thou 
foremost of those conversant with time, the auspicious autumn, 
green with Saptachhada flowers, hath set in and thou, 
given up to enjoyments, doth not percieve it. The sky, 




790 



RAM A FAN A. 



having the clouds removed, is full of clear stars and planets. 
The quarters, the ponds and rivers are all clear. O best 
of monkeys, finding thee forgetful, Lakshmana hath come 
here to inform thee that the proper time hath arrived. Do 
thou patiently hear all these harsh words of the high-souled 
Rama, racked with sorrow and separated from his spouse, 
which Lakshmana, shall relate unto thee. Thou hast acted 
improperly towards him, and I do not find any thing tending 
to thy welfare but thy satisfying Lakshmana with folded 
hands. The kings should be addressed with auspicious words 
by their counsellors always ministering unto them proper 
counsels. And it is for this reason, I am addressing thee with 
these sound words. Raghava, taking up his bow, while 
enraged, can bring under subjection the entire world, inhabited 
by the celestials, Asuras and Gandharbas. Remembering 
his former service, it doth not behgve thee, grateful as thou 
art, to excite his wrath, who should be pleased again. Bow- 
ing unto him, with thy chiMren and friends, do thou, O king, 
satisfying thy promise, seek his shelter like unto a wife 
placing herself under the control of her husband. O lord of 
monkeys, it doth not behove thee, to neglect even in thought, 
the behests of Rama and his younger brother ; for thou art 
fully aware of the prowess of Raghava like unto the lord of 
celestials, and passing human power. 



SECTION XXXIII. 



Thereupon, Lakshmana, the slayer of foes, command- 
ed, entered, at the behest of Rama, the pleasant city of 
Kishkindha situated in the centre of caves. Beholding 
Lakshmana, the highly powerful monkeys, having huge 
persons and waiting at the gate, stood all with folded hands. 
And seeing Da9aratha’s son highly enraged and sighing again 




KlSHKINDH&KlNDA M. 



791 



and again, the monkeys stood silent and did not interrupt 
him. The graceful Lakshmana espied that huge picturesque 
and celestial cave adorned with jewels and flowery gardens. 
It was filled with palatial buildings, various jewels and 
flowery trees, producing at all times wished-for fruits. It was 
beautified with good-looking monkeys — children of the 
celestials and Gandharbas wearing celestial garlands and 
clothes and assuming shapes at will. It was fragrant with the 
sweet smell of sandal wood, Aguru and lotuses and its high- 
ways were equally fragrant with the smell of honey. And 
Lakshmana beheld there many spacious buildings like unto 
the hills Vtndhya and Meru and rivers of clear water. And he 
also surveyed the picturesque dwellings of Angada, Mainda, 
Divida, Gavaya, Gabaksha, Gaja,Sarava, Vidhutmali, Samp&ti, 
Suryaksha, HanumSn, Beerabahu, Subahu, Nala, Kumuda, 
Sushena, Tar£, Jambaban, Dadhibaktra, Neela, Sunetra and 
Sup&tala like unto sable clouds adorned with excellent 
garlands, filled with rice and jewels and beautiful damsels. 
Unobstructed the highly powerful Saumitri entered the 
picturesque abode of Sugriva like unto the Sun entering into 
a collection of dense clouds. The abode of this lord of 
monkeys was like unto the palace of the Lord of celestials, 
ornamented with the tops of white buildings resembling the 
summits of the Kaila^a hill and flowery trees producing at 
all times, wished-for fruits; covered with beautiful trees 
having cool shades and bearing celestial fruits and flowers 
resembling the molten-gold. And that virtuous-souled one, 
crossing the seven rooms filled with conveyances and seats 
beheld the secret apartment (of that monkey-chief), having 
many a gold and silver bed-steads with excellent coverlets 
and fine seats. No sooner had he entered the inner apart- 
ment than he heard a musical sound, well-measured and 
accompanied by the music of the stringed instrument. And 
that highly powerful one beheld in the abode of Sugriva 
many a beautiful damsel proud of their youth and beauty, 




792 



k&MlYANA. 



sprung from respectable families, adorned with' splendid 
ornaments, engaged in stringing excellent garlands. And 
he observed Sugriva’ s servants, well? fed, contented, not 
hurry in offering their services and without splendid 
ornaments. Hearing the sounds of women’s girdles and 
their Nupurs ,* the graceful Lakshmana became highly 
ashamed. And highly enraged at the sound of the ornaments, 
the hero filled all the quarters with the twang of his bow. 
Lakshmana of mighty-arms stood silent in a nook, thinking 
of his improper conduct of entering into (Sugriva’ s) seraglio, 
albeit he was wrought up with ire in consequence of Sugriva’s 
neglecting R2Lma’s service. Thereupon Sugriva, the lord of 
monkeys, being apprised of Lakshmana’s approach by the 
twang of his bow and terrified, trembled on his throne, 
and thought aside : — “Forsooth hath Saumitri, fond of his 
brother, come, whose approach was announced by Angada 
before. Informed before by Angada of his approach, and 
made doubly sure by the twang of the bow, that monkey 
came to know of Lakshmana’s arrival and turned pale. 
Thereupon Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, wrought 
up with fear, addressed the fine looking Tetri with the 
following well-meaning words : — “O beautiful lady, dost 
thou know, why hath the mild-natured younger brother 
of Rama, arrived here enraged ? O blameless lady, 
dost thou perceive any cause of the Prince’s wrath \ 
Forsooth, that best of men, is not enraged for a slight 
cause. Considering aright, dost thou speedily inform 
me if I have performed any improper act towards R&ma. 
O fine lady, do thou approach him in person and pacify 
him with soothing words. Beholding thee, that pure-souled 
one shall not be worked with ire ; great men do never behave 
roughly towards the females. Approaching him do thou 
console him and thereafter I shall see that conqueror of foes 
having eyes resembling lotus-petals.” Thereupon T&ri, 



* An ornament for their toes or feet. — T. 




KlSHKlNDHlKlNDA M. 



793 



with (altering feet and eyes wild with wine, the golden 
chains of her zone flowing (about her hips), — graced with 
auspicious marks, saught Lakshmana’ s presence with down- 
cast looks. Beholding Tara, the queen of the lord of 
nonkeys, Lakshmana, the high-souled son of a king, 
restraining his anger on the approach of a female, stood 
with his head hung down, conducting himself like an 
ascetic. Renouncing modesty under the influence of liquor, 
and finding the king's son well pleased, Tar§, spake unto 
Lakshmana, bold and loving words, in order to console him. 
“O son of a king, what is the cause of thy wrath ? Who 
is there who hath not abode by thy commands ? Who 
can remain without anxiety, beholding fire in a forest filled 
with dried trees ?” Hearing the soothing words of Tara, 
Lakshmana, undaunted, spoke again, greatly manifesting his 
friendship : — “O thou intent on thy husband’s welfare, dost thou 
not perceive that thy husband is by and by losing piety and 
wealth, being addicted to amorous enjoyments? O Tar3, 
thy husband doth not think of us who are moved with sorrow — 
but is addicted to sensual enjoyments only, being surrounded 
by parasites. (Having promised that he would institute 
enquiries about Sita after four months), that lord of monkeys 
hath well-nigh spent the entire period, being influenced 
by liquor and addicted to enjoyments along with thee. For 
the attainment of piety and wealth, drinking is not a proper 
course. It is by drinking that people lose piety, wealth 
and desire. He who doth not return the services of his 
benefactor, loseth piety. He who loscth friendship with a 
qualified friend, loseth wealth. He is the best friend who is 
gifted with wealth and is truthful ; and thy husband hath relin- 
quished such a friend gifted with these two qualities. And, 
therefore, he doth not abide by the virtue of preserving 
friendship. O thou expert in business, this being the case, 
do thou advise us as to what we should do.” Hearing the sweet 
words of Lakshmana consonant with piety and wealth, 



100 




794 



kXMAFANA' 



TSra. again addressed him about R&ma’s business, yet 
remaining unaccomplished, with words inspiring con- 
fidence, — “O son of a king, this is not the time for dis- 
playing thy wrath ; it is not proper to be angry with one’s 
own friends. O hero, it behoveth thee to put up with 
the error of him who hath thy welfare in view. 

0 prince, who, accomplished with excellent virtues, 

gets enraged with one of inferior merits ? O 

prince, who, like thee, an offspring of asceticism, is 
worked up with ire against the virtue of forgiveness ? I 
know the (cause of the) wrath of that heroic monkey's friend. 

1 know the time for action. I know what thou hast done 
*for us. I know what is due from us to thee. And, O fore- 
most of men, I also know the irrisistible force of Kima. I 
know by whom Sugriva has been taken captive, and that 
•his heart is not now in the work. As thou hast come under 
•the governance of anger, thy mind has not felt the influence of 
desire. Even a human being that bath conceived love, does not 
stay for place or time or interest. Do thou forgive that lord 
of the monkey race, thy brother, influenced by carnality, who 
is by thee, and who through the urgency of lust, has 
banished shame. Even Maharshis finding delight in religion 
and asceticism, setting their hearts upon satisfying lust, 
(ultimately) become fast bound by ignorance. But this is a 
monkey, volatile by nature, and hath, furthermore, been 
enjoying regal state — why should he not act thus ?” Having 
thus said unto Lakshmana of immeasurable intelligence 
words fraught with high import, that female monkey, her 
eyes drooping with languor, again sadly spake in this wise 
for the behoof of her husband, “O foremost of men, although 
Sugriva has come under the sway of desire, he bath, to secure 
Ahy good, ere this issued orders for preparations to be made. 
And monkeys by hundreds and thousands and hotis % in* 
habiting various mountains, possessed of exceeding prowess, 
have already arrived ‘here). Do thou therefore, O mighty* 




KlSHKINDHlKlNDA M. 79> 

1 

armed one, come. (Having rushed towards the inner apartment),, 
thou hast not suffered in character. For the good to behold 
others’ wives in a friendly spirit, cannot bring on unrighteous- 
ness.” Permitted by T&r&, that long-armed repressor of 
foes, urged on by (the required) speed, entered the inner 
apartment. There seated on a superb seat spread with a 
costly carpet, he found Sugriva resembling the sun himself, 
his person decked with noble ornaments, of a dignified 
presence, famous, wearing gay garlands and attire, invincible 
like unto the great Indra. And surrounded by dames 
adorned with elegant ornaments and wreaths, Sugriva with 

f his eyes still more reddened in wrath, looked like the Des- 
troyer himself. Then deeply embracing Umi, the large- 
eyed hero of the hue of fine gold, seated on an excellent seat,, 
saw the powerful Saumitri having expansive eyes. 



SECTION XXXtV. 

:oo: 

Seeing that foremost of men, Lakshmana, exercised with 
wrath, as he entered in without let, Sugriva was seized 
with sadness. And seeing Da^aratha’s son, wroth, and 
breathing hard, and flaming up in energy, and burning in 
consequence of the calamity that had overtaken his brother, 
that chief of monkeys started up, leaving his golden seat, 
like unto the mighty ornamented standard of the great Indra. 
And as Sugriva rose up, Um& and the other females rose 
up, like unto stars appearing in the sky when the full moon 
risen. And with eyes reddened, and his hands folded, 
the graceful Sugriva came (before Lakshmana) and stood 
there like a mighty Kalpa tree. And the wrathful Lakshmana 
spake unto Sugriva stationed among women, having Umi 
for his second, and resembling the moon with the stars, 




796 XlA/irANA. 

saying, — “The king that is nobly endowed by heredity, and 
is kind, that hath subdued his senses, and is grateful and truth- 
telling, obtains renown in this world. And who is more 
wicked than that king who, rooted in unrighteousness, makes 
false promises unto friends intent upon his welfare ? He 
that speaks a falsehood with reference to a horse, becomes 
guilty o( the deaths of an hundred horses : he committing 
himself to a falsehood relative to a cow, reapeth the demerit 
of slaying a thousand kine ; while he that uttereth an un- 
truth touching a person, destroys self as well as his kindred. 
That ungrateful wight that, having at first attained benefit 
at the hands of his friends, doth not requite it, is, O lord of 
monkeys, worthy of being slain by all creatures. Seeing 
an ingrate wretch, the wrathful Brahm& sang the (previous) 
stoka, bowed down unto by all the worlds. Do thou under- 
stand that, O monkey. The pious provide deliverance for 
the cow-killer, the wine-biber, the thief, and the violator 
of vows ; but for the ungrateful person there is no deliver- 
ance whatever. Thou art ignoble and ungrateful and lying, 
O monkey, since, having been formerly benefitted by R&ma, 
thou dost not requite his services. Having been benefitted 
by R&ma, thou, anxious to repay his kindness, shouldst 
exert thyself in search of Sit&. But, of false promises, 
thou hast been indulging in gross enjoyments, — nor doth 
Rama know thee for a serpent, croaking like a frog * A 
sinful wretch and of wicked soul, thou hast obtained the 
kingdom of the monkeys through the agency of the eminent- 
ly virtuous, kind and high-souled RSma. Thou dost not 
acknowledge the good offices rendered unto thee by the 
high-souled R&ghava ; and therefore, slain by means of 
sharpened shafts, thou shalt soon see V&li. The way that 
hath been wended by the slain V&li, is not yet narrowed. Do 
thou, O Sugriva, desist in time : do not walk in the wake 

4 Crying through the voice of the frog in its mouth. Another meaning 
is, “croaking like a frog, to allure frogs to it.”—' T. 




KISH KIN DHAkANDA M. 



797 



of VSLli. Do not behold the shafts resembling thunder-bolts 
shot from the bow of that best of the Ikshw&kus. Then, 
attaining happiness, thou shalt pass thy days in peace. Nor 
do thou mentally neglect Rtma’s business. 9 ’ 



SECTI ON XXXV. 



w HEN Sumitr&’s son, Lakshmana, had spoken thus, 
flaming in energy, T5r3L of face fair as the moon, said unto 
bim, “O Lakshmana, thou ought not to speak thus : and this 
lord of monkeys does not deserve to hear this harsh speech 
from thy lips, in especial. Sugriva is not ungrateful, or 
cunning, or heartless ; nor doth he, O hero, deal in falsehood ; 
nor is he deceitful. Nor hath the heroic monkey, O hero, 
forgotten the good, incapable of being done by others in battle, 
that the hero, RSLma, hath done in his behalf. And, O 
afflictor of foes, through Rama’s grace, Sugriva hath here 
attained fame and the enduring empire of the monkeys, as 
well as UmSL and myself. Having lain down miserably before, 
Sugriva, now that he hath attained this supreme happiness, 
doth not heed his urgent duties, like the ascetic Vi9wamitra. 
Attached unto Ghritachi, O Lakshmana, the pious and mighty 
ascetic, Vi^wSmitra looked upon ten years as one day ; 
and that best of those conversant with time, Vifwamitra of 
mighty energy, did not perceive that the time (for doing a 
certain act) had arrived. What is to be said of other people ? 
O Lakshmana, it behoveth RSLma to forgive one who hath 
all the bodily exigencies, who is fatigued, and who is not 
satisfied with the pleasures of Kama. Nor, O Lakshmana, 
doth it behove thee, without ascertaining the exact import of 
things, to become suddenly subject to wrath, like any inferior 
person. O chief of men, persons endowed with the quality 
of goodness, like unto thee, do not suffer themselves to come 




7yS 



KAMli'ANA. 



under the sway of passion, without (at first) heedfully revolv- 
ing matters. I crave thy favor with concentrated mind, 0 
thou that knowest morality. Renounce the mighty grief 
that springs from thy ire. This is my conviction that for 
compassing R&ma's welfare, Sugriva can resign Uml and 
myself, and Angada, and the kingdom and wealth and corn 
and animals. Slaying that worst of Rlkshasas, Sugriva will 
bring Raghava with SitS, like unto the moon accompanied 
by Roliini. Without slaying hundreds, of thousands of 
Kotis, and thirty-six Ayutas, thousands, and hundreds of 
irrepressible R&kshasas wearing shapes at will, (R&ma) can 
not slay Rivana, by whom Maithili hath been carried away. 
They are incapable, O Lakshmana, of being slain (by Rlma) 
in battle, unless he is supported (by others). Rivana is a 
wily warrior, and hence is the special need of Sugriva. 
That knowing lord of monkeys, Vlli, had told me all this. 
I do not know how Ravana had secured this host : I say what 
I had heard from V&li. For rendering thee assistance, the 
foremost monkeys have been despatched in order to summon 
to the conflict numerous principal monkeys. Expecting 
these powerful and exceedingly strong ones, for attaining 
Raghava’s end, this lord of monkeys doth not (yet) sally out. 
Things, O Saumitri, have beforehand been so satisfactorily 
arranged by Sugriva, that this very day the mighty one will 
be joined with all those monkeys. This very day billions 
of bears and thousands of golangulas as well as innumerable 
Kotis of monkeys flaming in energy shall join thee. There- 
fore, O subduer of enemies, banish thy anger. Seeing this thy 
face wrought up with wrath, and thy eyes appearing like red 
sores, the wives of the best of monkeys experience no peace, 
and they are agitated by the fear that exercised them of late.” 




KlSHKlNDHlKlNDA M 



799 



8 E C T I O Nr XXXVI . 



TT uMBLY addressed in these words informed with moral- 
ity. Sumitr&’s son, resuming his native mildness, accepted 
them. On his accepting the speech, the lord of monkeys 
like a wet cloth cast off from him the fear he had conceived 
on account of Lakshmana. Then Sugriva — lord of monkeys — 
tore away the gaudy and variegated garland on his neck — • 
potent with many a virtue, and became deprived of energy. 
And that master of all the monkeys, Sugriva, gladdening 
Lakshmana of dreadful prowess, humbly observed unto him, 
“Thou son unto SumitrH, by the favor of Rama have I receiv- 
ed back my lost luck, my fame, and this eternal monarchy 
of the monkeys. O king’s son, who is capable of repaying 
even in part an action like that of the divine (R&ma) 
renowned by means of his own acts ? By virtue of native 
energy, and merely with my help, the righteous RUghava 
shall recover Sita and slay RSvana to boot. What need of 
assistance to him who with a single shaft rived seven giant 
trees, a mountain, and the Earth. O Lakshmana, what is 
the use of help to him the sounds of whose stretching bow 
made the Earth tremble with her mountains ? O best of men, 
when that foremost of men shall set out for slaying his enemy, 
R&vana along with those going before him, I will follow him. If 
through my confidence, or presuming upon our amity, 
I have transgressed in any way, (Rama) ought to excuse his 
servant, — for there is no servant that doth not transgress.” 
When the high-souled Sugriva had said this, Lakshmana 
became well pleased, and he spake from love, — “Having, in 
especial, thee endeued with humility, my brother, O monarch 
of monkeys, is every way strong, O Sugriva. Such 
is thy strength, O Sugriva, and such thy self-denial, that thou 
art fully worthy to enjoy the good fortune of the king of 
monkeys. O Sugriva, by thy help, the puissant R&ma shall 




8oo 



KAjL'lrANA. 



speedily slay his foe. Of this there is not the least doubt. 
O Sugriva, what thou, virtuous, grateful and never turning 
away from fight, hast said is fit and proper. What knowing 
person, excepting, O foremost of monkeys, thyself and my elder 
brother, can speak so ? Resembling R&ma himself in strength 
and prowess, thou, O chief of monkeys, hast been ordained 
his help by the gods. But, O hero, do thou speedily go out 
with me and soothe thy friend aggrieved for the ravishment 
of his wife. And do thou, my friend, forgive what rough 
speech, on hearing the utterances of R&ma sunk in grief, I 
have given thee. ,, 



S E CTI ON xxxvi i. 



Thus addressed by the magnanimous Lakshmana,Sugriva 
said unto Ilanum&n, staying beside him, “Those that dwell 
on the summits of Mahendra, Himavat, Vindhya and Kail&^a; 
on Mandara,the peaks of PSndu and the five hills; on mount- 
ains wearing the hue of the infant sun, and ever bright ; and 
those inhabiting the West, beyond the sea ; on mountains in 
the mansions of the ?un, looking like the evening sky ; and 
those dreadful foremost of monkeys that inhabit 
Padmachala, those monkeys that, resembling colly- 
rium-like clouds, and having the strength of the lord of 
elephants, dwell in the Anjana hill ; monkeys, possessing the 
splendour of gold, inhabiting the caverns of Mah&caila ; those 
resorting to the sides of Mcru, as well as those dwelling in 
the Dhumra mountains ; and those, having the hues of the 
infant sun, dwelling in the Mah£runa mountain, drinking the 
Maireya wine ; and those dwelling in mighty fair and fragrant 
forests and romantic hermitages all round, lying on the 
skirts of woods,— do thou at once bring all these— all th^ 




KISHK 1 NDHXK&NDA M: 801 

foremost monkeys of the world, by means of gifts and con- 
ciliation, and through the agency of more than usually fleet 
monkeys. I know those monkeys that I have first despatched, 
to be gifted with great velocity*, — yet, for urging speed upon 
them, do thou send other foremost of monkeys. Do thou 
directly bring up here those monkey-chiefs that are given 
op to lust or are dilatory. Those wicked ones, that finding 
fault with the royal mandate, do not (come in) at my com- 
mand within ten days, must be slain. Let those hundreds 
and thousands and kotis of leonine monkeys that abide by 
my mandate, hie (hence) at my behest. Let (monkeys) 
resembling clouds or mountains, cover up the sky ; and let 
the foremost monkeys of dreadful forms march hence at my 
command. Let all the monkeys on earth, acquainted with 
motion, hying themselves and summoning speed at my 
command, bring all the monkeys.’ 1 Hearing the words of 
the monkey-king, the son of the Wind-god despatched power- 
ful monkeys in all directions. Despatched by the king, the 
monkeys, ranging the sphere of birds and stars, immediately 
went through the welkin. And on oceans and mountains, 
in forests and tanks, the monkeys began to send away all the 
apes on behalf of R&ma. Hearing the mandate of that king 
of kings, Sugriva, resembling the Hour of death, the monkeys, 
conceiving fear for Sugriva, set out. And monkeys resembling 
collyrium (in hue), numbering three kotis, endeued with huge 
®ight, set out from the Anjana hill for the place where 
Rftghava was. And ten kotis having the splendour of molten 
gold, inhabiting the mountain where the sun sets, set out. 
And a thousand kotis , hued like the lion’s mane, came from 
the peaks of Kail&£a. And of those dwelling in Himalaya, 
subsisting on fruits and roots, numbering a thousand and 
lotis % a thousand appeared. And thousands of dreadful 
donkeys of terrible deeds, hued like charcoal, numbering 

• The commentator slips the sense here. According to him, the meaning is, 
monkey* whom I home first sent, are known to me. — T. 

IOI 




802 



RAmIFANJ. 



kotis, rushed suddenly from Vindhya. And there exists n 
record of the number of those inhabiting the shores of th 
ocean of milk, and the dwellers in the Tam&la forests, as well s 
those subsisting on cocoanuts. And, as if drinking up the sui 
the mighty monkey host came from forests and caves an 
rivers. And it came to pass that those heroic monkeys th< 
had gone away to spur others on, found a mighty tree c 
Himavat. On that sacred mount in days of yore there too 
place a pleasing Mahe^wara* sacrifice. There the monkey 
found grateful fruits and roots sprung from the streams < 
sacrificial oblations, and resembling ambrosia. He tha 
partakes of those excellent fruits and roots sprung from th< 
sacrificial ingredients, doth not experience hunger for ; 
month. Those prime monkeys, feeding on fruits, gathere< 
those sapid fruits and roots and medicinal herbs. And foi 
compassing the good of Sugriva, repairing thither, the 
monkeys brought ordorous blossoms from the sacrificial 
ground. And all those foremost of monkeys, taking all the 
monkeys of the earth, hastily set off in the van of the herds. 
And in a short while, those fast-fleeting apes speedily reached 
Kishkindha, where the monkey Sugriva was. And taking 
the healing herbs and the fruits and roots, the monkeys made 
them over to Sugriva, and said, “Having traversed mountainSi 
rivers and forests, all the monkeys of the earth bend their 
steps towards thee in obedience to thy command." Hearing 
this, Sugriva — lord of monkeys — was well pleased, and with 
a glad heart accepted all those presents. 



3ECTI ON XXXVIII I. 



H aving accepted all those presents, (Sugriva), after 
soothing the monkeys, dismissed them. Having dismissed 



♦ The celestial horse-sacrifice.— T. 




kishkindha kAnda m 



803 



lie thousands of apes, who had performed their task, he 
deemed himself as well as the mighty Rlghava as having 
secured success. Then Lakshmana in sweet words spoke 
unto the exceedingly strong chief of monkeys — Sugriva — 
gladdening him, Ct If it please thee, O placid one, I will go 
out of KisbkindhS.” Hearing Lakshmana’s soft speech, 
Sugriva, highly delighted, said, "Be it so. Let us go. I abide 
by thy behest / 9 Having said this unto Lakshmana of auspi- 
cious marks, Sugriva dismissed the women with T&r& at their 
head. Then Sugriva in a loud voice summoned the foremost 
monkeys, saying, "Come (hither )/ 9 Hearing his words, those 
monkeys that could present themselves before the females, 
did so with joined hands. To them, who had present- 
ed themselves, said the king, of splendour resembling 
that of the Sun, "Do, ye monkeys, bring hither a car / 9 
bearing his words, monkeys uniting vigor with celerity, 
brought a car lovely to behold. Seeing the car brought up, 
the lord of monkeys said unto Sumitra’s son, “O Lakshmana, 
ascend speedily / 9 Having said this, Sugriva in company 
with Lakshmana swiftly ascended the golden car resembling 
the sun, yoked with numerous steeds. With a pale umbrella 
held over his head, and white chowris waving around, with 
conchs and trumpets blowing, eulogized by bards, Sugriva 
marched out, having obtained supreme regal auspiciousness. 
And surrounded by hundreds of high-spirited apes and 
armed people, he proceeded whither Rama was staying. — 
And having arrived at the excellent spot which was the home 
of Rama, that highly energetic one alighted from the car 
along with Lakshmana. And having come to Rama, Sugriva 
(stood) folding his hands. And when Sugriva had folded his 
hands, the monkeys also did so. And beholding the mighty 
host of the monkeys resembling a tank filled with lotus buds, 
Rama was well-pleased with Sugriva. And raising up the 
monkey-king who had bent his head at Rama’s feet, Raghava 
embraced him from love and regard. Having embraced- 




804 



RAMA VAN A. 



Sugriva f that righteous one said unto him, “Be seated/ 1 
And seeing Sugriva seated on the ground, R&ma said, “He, 
O best of monkeys, is a king who, O hero, in season follows 
righteousness, pleasure and profit, always dividing the same 
(among all.) He that, renouncing righteousness and the 
good, devotes himself to pleasure solely, is like a man that 
falling asleep on the top of a tree, wakes when he hath fallen 
down. That king is verily virtuous that, engaged in uproot- 
ing foes and advancing friends, attends to all the three ends. 
O destroyer of foes, the time is come for exertion : do thou, 
O lord of monkeys, bethink thyself along with thy monkey 
ministers/ 1 Thus addressed, Sugriva said unto Rlma, “O 
mighty-armed one, my lost luck, and repute, and the entire 
monkey kingdom I have received back through thy gift, 
owing to thine and thy brothers grace, thou foremost of 
victors. He that, having received a good office, doth not 
requite it, reapeth obloquy among persons. These hundreds 
of prime monkeys, O destroyer of enemies, have come here, 
bringing with them all the monkeys of the world. O 
Righava, bears and monkeys, heroic Golangulas — acquainted 
with woods and forests and strongholds, and of terrible 
shapes — and monkeys who are the sons of deities, wearing forms 
at will — stay on the way, O Ragbava, surrounded by their own 
armies. And, O hero, O repressor of foes, monkeys surround- 
ed by hundreds, and hundred thousands, and kotis, and 
ayutas, and sankus ,* and arvudas , and hundreds of arvudas, 
and madhyas , and antyas , wait (here). And samudras , and 
pardrdhas of monkeys — leaders of herds — inhabiting Meru 
and Vindhya, resembling clouds or bills, and in might 
resembling the great India, are on their way unto thee, O 
king. They will join thee for battling the fiend in the field ; 
and, slaying RStvana in fight, shall bring Mitbila’s daughter." 

* A Sanku is a thousand Arvudas ; a Madhya is an Arvuda ten times ; an 
Antya is a Madhya ten times ; a Samudra is a Madhya twenty times ; and a 
Vardrdha % a Samudra thirty times. — T. 




' KlSHKlNDHlKlNDAM. 



805 



Thereat the puissant son of the Earth’s lord, witnessing the 
preparations made by the heroic monkey, remaining under 
his command, appeared like a blown blue lotus. 



SECT I ON xxxix. 



As Sugriva was speaking thus with joined hands, that 
best of the righteous, Rama, embraced him with his arms, 
and then replied, “That Indra poureth down showers, is no 
wonder, nor that this thousand-rayed Sun dispells darkness 
from the sky ; nor yet that, O mild one, the Moon by his rays 
causes the clear night. (And in a similar way), friends like 
thee bring delight, O subduer of foes. O mild one, that 
whatever is graceful, should be harboured in thee is not 
•trange.* I know, O Sugriva, that thou always speakst 
what is for my good. Assisted by thee, my friend, I shall 
in battle vanquish all my foes. Thou being my friend and 
my ally, shouldst assist me. That worst of Rakshasas hath 
harried away Maithili, to bring down destruction upon himself, 
even as Anuhl&da ravished Puloma’s daughter, Sachi, deceiving 
her sire. That RSvana I will at no distant date slay with 
my sharpened shafts, even as that slayer of enemies, he of an 
hundred sacrifices — slew the haughty father of Paulomi.” 
Presently appeared volumes of dust, and the hot and fierce 
ays of the sun were hid in the sky. And darkened by the 
(loom, all sides became bewildered. And the entire earth 
rith her mountains, forests, and woods, trembled. Then the 
rhole ground was covered with innumerable monkeys gifted 
rith great strength, and having sharp teeth, and resembling 

• The commentator in his usual way of reading between the lines, says 
at the sense is * — That thou hast gathered forces for serving thy friend , is not 
rang*. O placid one t it is well . I give the sense the sloka naturally yields. 
T. 





8o6 



RlMlVANA. 



kings of men. Then surrounded by leaders of monkey-herd^* 
and retinues numbering hundreds of kotis, and monkey chiefs 
from rivers, and mountains, and seas, endowed with prodigious 
strength, and other apes inhabiting forests, having voices 
resembling clouds — and monkeys hued like the infant sun, 
or white like the moon, or colored like the filaments of the 
lotus, or pale, having their homes in the Golden mountain— in 
all, numbering ten thousand kotis , — appeared the graceful and 
heroic monkey, named Satavali. Then, having the splendour 
of the Golden hill, the puissant sire of T£r& was seen at the 
head of many thousand kotis. Then Um&'s father, that lord, 
the father-in-law of Sugriva, arrived, accompanied with other 
thousands of kotis (of monkeys), — resembling the filaments 
of the lotus, of face like unto the youthful sun, intelligent, 
the foremost of monkeys — supreme among them all. And 
Hanum&n’s father, the graceful Ke^arin, appeared in company 
with many thousands of monkeys. And Gav&ksha— sovereign 
of Golangul&s — endowed with dreadful might, appeared, 
surrounded by thousands of kotis of monkeys. And Dhumxa 
of bears endowed with terrific speed— destroyer of foes— 
appeared, surrounded by two thousand kotis. And the leader 
of herds, named Panama, of exceeding prowess, came, accom- 
panied with three kotis, mighty and dreadful. And the leader 
of herds, named Nila, of huge body, resembling a mass of 
blue collyrium, appeared with ten kotis. Then the exceed- 
ingly powerful Gavava — leader of herds, having the splendour 
of the Golden mountain, arrived with five kotis. And that 
powerful leader of herds — Darimukha, came, surrounded by 
thousands of kotis, and took up his post by Sugriva. And 1 
Mainda and Dwivida — sons of A9wi both— of mighty strength, 
appeared with kotis upon thousands of kotis of monkeys. And 
the powerful and heroic Gaya (came), surrounded by three 
kotis. And the king of bears, J&mbav&n by name, (came), 
surrounded by ten kotis , and enlisted himself under the 
command of Sugriva. And (the monkey) named Rumana, 




K1SHKJNDHA KIND a m. 



807 



possessed of energy, and strong, came swiftly, surrounded by 
an hundred kotis of powerful monkeys. Then, followed at his 
back by hundreds and thousands of kotis , came the monkey, 
Gandham&dana. Then came the young prince Angada, in 
prowess resembling his sire, — accompanied by a thousand 
padmas and an hundred sankhas. Then appeared at a distance, 
accompanied by five kotis of monkeys endowed with dreadful 
prowess, — Tara, having the splendour of a star. And then ap- 
| pcared Indraj&nu, the heroic monkey and leader of herds — lord 
i of eleven kotis — surrounded by them. Then followed Rambha, 
resembling the infant sun, accompanied by an ayuta , a thousand, 
and an hundred. Then appeared to the view the stout monkey, 
named Durmukha, heroic lord of herds, surrounded by two kotis. 
And Hanum&n showed himself, surrounded by a thousand 
kotis of monkeys, resembling peaks of Kailua, of dreadful 
*igor. And the exceedingly energetic Nala came, attended 
With an hundred kotis, a thousand, and an hundred monkeys, 
living in trees. Then surrounded by ten kotis (of monkeys), 
Came the shapely Darimukha before the high-souled 
Sugriva, from a country bordering on a river. And Sarabha, 
Kamuda, Vahni, the monkey Rambha, — and many other 
monkeys — lords of herds — passing ennumeration — wearing 
shapes at will, came, covering the entire earth with her 
mountains and forests. And all the monkeys of the world were 
some of them coming and others putting up. And monkeys— 
some of them dripping, and some leaping, and some roar- 
ing — gathered round Sugriva, like clouds gathering round the 
sun. And, crying in various tones, prime monkeys furnish- 
ed with arms, with bent heads spoke humbly to that lord of 
monkeys — Sugriva. And other foremost of monkeys, gather- 
ing together duly, came before Sugriva with joined hands. 
Sugriva standing with joiued hands, expeditiously informed 
R£ma of the arrival of the monkey-leaders in hot haste ; and 
then spake (to them), saying, “O chiefs of monkeys, stationing 
the forces duly near mountain-rills and all the woods, let him 




808 hXmXVANA. 

that is conversant with the army, ascertain who have com ^ 
and who have not.” 



SECTION XL. 



Then that lord of monkeys, the successful Sugriva, spake 
unto Rama — lion among men and destroyer of hostile hosts— 
saying, ‘‘Those foremost monkeys endeued with strength and 
capable of wearing any shape at will, and possessed of the 
splendour of the mighty Indra, — that inhabit my territories, 
have come and stationed themselves. And these monkeys— 
dreadful, and resembling Daityas and DSLnavas — are accom- 
panied by powerful monkeys of terrific prowess, who 
have displayed their virtue in many a field, — and are of 
famed renown in battle and, powerful, and who have 
mastered languor and are celebrated in prowess and 
sterling in their profession. O Rama, these kotis of 
apes that have arrived, inhabiting earth andj water and 
various mountainous tracts, are at thy service. All abide 
by thy command — all are intent upon the welfare of their 1 
master, and, O subduer of foes, they are competent to bring 
about thy end. And in company with many thousands and 
innumerable ones that have shewn their ability in many a 
field, have come monkeys dreadful, and resembling Daityas 
and Danavas. If, O lion among men, thou conceive that 
the time is ripe, tell it (unto me). It behoves thee to cam* 
mand those forces, remaining under thy sway. Although I 
am full well acquainted with the work in which they are to 
be employed, yet thou ought to order them as to what they 
are to accomplish.” When Sugriva had spoken tlntfb 
Da;aratha’s sou, R£ma, embracing him with his arms, said, ■ 
“O placid one, do thou learn whether Videha’s daughter is . 
alive or not ; as well as ascertain the country, where, O tbos J 




«• 

r 






V 

V 
* 




KISH HINDU AkAND A At. 



809 

endowed with eminent wisdom, liveth Ravana. Having come 
at Vaidehi and R&vana’s abode, shall I then appoint the time 
along with thee. O lord of monkeys, I am not the master in 
this matter, nor Lakshmana : thou art the cause of this under- 
taking, as well as, O monarch of monkeys, the lord. Do 
thou therefore, O lord, command these as to what is to be 
done by them in my behalf. O hero, thou certainly knowest 
my business. My second friend (Lakshmana being first), 
thou art potent, wise, conversant with seasonableness, cogni- 
sant of profit, and engaged in our welfare/' Thus addressed^ 
Sugriva in presence of Rama and the intelligent Lakshmana, 
said unto a leader of herds and lord of apes, named Vinata, 
having the splendour of a hill, blazing and emitting sounds 
as those of clouds, ‘*0 foremost of monkeys, accompanied 
with apes resembling the sun and the moon, thou cognizant 
of time, place and morals, and sagacious in deciding course 
of action, — surrounded by hundreds and thousands of active 
opes, march towards the Eastern quarter, furnished with 
Woods, forests and hills. There, in mountain fastnesses, and 
forests and rivers, do thou search Videha's daughter, Sit£, as 
well as the abode of Ravana. And while on the search 
around for R&ma’s beloved wife, Sita, daughter-in-law unto 
I Da^aratha, thou shouldst search the beautiful Bhagirathi, and 
the Sarayu, and the Kaugiki ; the Kalindi, and the charming 
YamunS, and the mighty hill bordering thereon ; and the 
Saraswati, and the Sindhu, and the Sona with water resem- 
bling ruby ; and the Mahi and K&lamahi, garnished with 
woods and hills, — the large tracts — Brahmamalas, Videhas, 
and Milavans, and KS^ikosalas, and Magadhas, and Pundras, 
and Angas ; and grounds native to silkworms, and contain- 
ing mines of silver ; and mountains and cities embosmed in 
(he sea. Do thou also search through the houses in Mandara, 
belonging to people having ears resembling cloths, reach- 
ing their nether lips, and mouths resembling iron, — one- 
footed and fleet withal ; and whose descendants never 




8io 



rAiuIfana. 



deteriorate ; — and to anthropophagi ; and hunters dwelling 
on islands; having sharp hair, gold-hued, pleasing, and subsist 
ing on raw fish ; and to creatures — tiger-man forms — terrible 
to behold ; and, ye dwellers of woods, do ye carefully search 
those places that are accessible by crags and bounds, — and 
the island of Yava, adorned by seven several kingdoms, and 
the island of Suvarna, and Rupayaka, — thronged by gold 
miners. And, going beyond the island of Yava, (one comes 
upon) the hill called Sisira, which pierceth the heavens by 
its peaks, and is inhabited by gods and demons. In all these 
mountain fastnesses, cascades and woods, do ye together 
search for the renowned wife of R&ma. Then, arriving at the 
rapid red waters going under the name of Sona, and repairing 
to the other shore of the ocean, the abode of Siddhas and 
Ch&ranas, do ye search all round for R&vana in company 
with Sit§, in the sweet sacred spots and picturesque woods. 
And ye should explore forests, mountain-sprung streams, wild 
tracts subject to storms, and mountains containing ceverns. 
Then it behoves you to examine horrible ocean islands, 
heaving with waves, terrific, resounding, — of haughty bearing 
in consequence of winds. There, huge-bodied Asuras, hun- 
gering for a long period, permitted by BrahmS, capture 
creatures, resorting to shades. And adroitly arriving at that 
great sea, like unto clouds at the universal dissolution, inhabi' 
ted by mighty snakes, sending loud sounds, — and there, afte* 
passing the terrific sea of red waters called Yellow, ye will 
behold a mighty knarled Silinali, There, built by Vifwa- 
karman, peak-like, gigantic, resembling Kailua, (towereth) th^ 
mansion of Vinata’s offspring, named Mandeha. There, grin* 
Rakshasas named Mandehas, resembling hills, of diverse 
shapes, capable of inspiring fear, hang head foremost on 
rocks. Day after day at sunrise, these R&kshasas heated (by 
solar rays) and struck dead by Brahma energy,* again an4 j 



again (hang on the crags). Then wilt thou, O thou that art 
9 The commentator explains : energy darted from the three ordtrtr-T* 




KISHKINDHlKkNDA M. 



811 



bard to repress, proceeding, view the sea named Kshiroda, 
having the hue of pale clouds, and looking like a necklace, 
because of the ripples (on its surface). In it there are the 
nighty white mountain going by the name of Rishada, 
fcvered with trees bearing oderous blossoms ; as well as 
he tank known under the name of Sudar^ana, swarming with 
wans and shining silver lotuses having golden filaments. 
)esirous of sport, resort to this tank delighted troops of. 
fivudhas and Ch&ranas, Yakshas, Kinnaras and Apsaras. 
saving behind Kshiroda, ye monkeys, ye will soon 
tfter behold the Jalada sea, striking terror into all beings. 
Here presideth that mighty ire-born Energy of him* 
embodied in) the mouth of a mule. This wondrous (universe) 
xmtaining mobile and immobile things and fraught with 
jreat impetus, is the aliment of this Energy. There are 
teard the cries of feeble creatures inhabiting the sea, who 
>egan to wail on witnessing the mouth of the mule. On the 
*orth of the Swadu sea, lie thirteen yojanas (of land), named 
I&tarupa9ila,t exceeding spacious, and of the splendour of 
{old. There, ye monkeys, ye will behold that serpent, the 
bolder of Earth — resembling the moon, and with expansive 
tyes like lotus-petals — seated at the summit of the mount, — 
that one worshipped of all deities, having a thousand heads, — 
the god Ananta, clad in blue apparel. And by the dais 
[there) at the top of the mount is the golden palm, planted 
J y that high souled one, — which is like a banner. The chief 
>fthe celestials reared it in the Eastern region. After that 
3 the fair Rising mountain. Its golden peak measuring a 
kindred yojanas, reaching unto the heavens, rises nobly, with 
Q ountains at its base ; and looks beautiful with Salas, palms, 
^mSlas, and flowering Karnikaras, — golden, splendid and 
fcsembling the sun. There , t spreading a yojana around, 

* Sage Aurvi. — T. + Lit. of gold and stone . — T. 

| The commentator says that this locative refers to the summit c ithe Ris- 
t hill.— T. 



rAmAyana. 



Si 2 

towering up ten, is the peak named Saumanasa — all certainly 
of gold. There, formerly on the occasion of invading the 
earth with three paces, that foremost of persons, Vishnu, 
planting his first foot, planted the other on the summit of 
Meru. The sun, having passed by Jamvudwipa on the 
north, and, arriving at that mighty and eminent summit, 
(Saumanasa), again becometh visible to the dwellers of 
Jamvudwipa. There are seen those Valakhiiya Maharshis, 
named Vaikhanasas, — wearing the hue of the sun, leading an 
ascetic mode of life. This is the island of Sudar 9 ana, before 
which all creatures inspire energy and have their sight 
granted to them. You should search for Ravana with Vaidehi 
all round the top of that mountain as well as in its forests and 
woods. (Here) the first twilight enfolded in the glory of the 
golden hill and that of the high-souled Sun, appeared) roseate. 
As this is the first gateway of both Earth and Heaven, and as 
the sun first rises in this quarter, this is called the East. Ye 
should search the breast of its mountain, and fountains, and 
caves for Ravana in company with Vaidehi. Beyond that, is 
the exceedingly impassable Eastern quarter, thronged by 
the celestials, — covered with darkness and devoid of the 
sun and the moon. Do ye search for Janaki in all those 
rocks, woods and streams as well as in such spots as 
I have not mentioned. Ye foremost of monkeys, the 
monkeys are competent to proceed thus far. Beyond 
this, of the tract without sun and without limit, 1 know 
nothing. Meeting with Vaidehi and (arriving at) Ravana’s 
mansion, do ye, having reached the Rising hill, turn 
back, when it shall be a full month. Do not stay longer than 
a month. If ye do, ye shall be slain by me. Having attained 
your end, do ye turn back, having met with Maitluli. Having 
adroitly explored (the tract) loved of Mahendra, plated with 
woods, do ye, ye monkeys, having come at Sit3. — the beloved 
wife of that descendant of Raghu — desist, attaining happiness.” 





•The commentator says, “The GodAvari flowing through the countries to 
east of the Vindya mountains." — T. 
t Some texts read — Rishtikas instead. — T. 

| The tract, according to RAmAnuja, watered by the GodAvari in the vici- 
*T of Dandaka. — T. 

$ Another name of this hill is Malaya. — T. 










8 1 4 



RlMll'ANA. 



mits, graceful! furnished with picturesque flowering woods, — 
the mighty mountain having groves of excellent sandal. At 
the foot of the Malaya mountain eudeued with exceeding 
energy, ye will behold the noble stream K&veri, of pleasant 
waters, w'here sport troops of Apsar&s. /There) yo will see 
that foremost of saints, Agastya, resembling the sun. Per- 
mitted by that gratified high-souled one, ye will cross over 
the great river, TSmrapami, abounding in alligators. Like a 
youthful female in relation to her lover, she (T£mraparni}, 
with both her waters as well as islets concealed under beauti- 
ful sandal woods, bathes in the sea. Proceeding (therefrom), 
the monkeys shall see the grand golden gates belonging to 
the walls of the capital of the PSLndyas. Then arriving at the 
main, ye shall ascertain your ability or otherwise of crossing 
the same. In the bosom of the deep there, Agastya hath 
placed that foremost of mountains — the charming Mahendra, 
having picturesque plateaus ; golden, and beautiful, — with a 
portion of it sunk in the great ocean. For aye, He of 
a thousand eyes at Parvas visiteth this mountain embellished 
by various blossoming trees and creepers ; beauteous with 
divinities, and saints, and the foremost Yakshas and Apsar&s; 
thronged by numbers of Siddhas and Charanas ; and of sur- 
passing loveliness. On its other shore is an island extending 
over an hundred yojanas , inaccessible to men * and of splendid 
aspect. Do ye explore it all round. There, in particular, ye 
must every way search for Sita. That country belongs to 
the impious Ravana, worthy of being slain — the lord of 
R£kshasas, like unto the thousand-eyed (deity) in splendour. 
In the midst of the Southern sea belonging to him (R&vana), 
there is a Rakshasi, named AngS, who procureth her pray 
by casting her shadow. Having (by your search) satisfied 
yourselves as to those countries where ye might suspect Silft 
to be, do ye, your doubts dispelled, proceeding beyond that, 
(Lanka), search for the spouse of that monarch endeued with 



'Because,” says the commentator, '"of the profusion of gold in it."— T. 





KISHRINDHlKlNDAM. 



815 



unbounded energy. In the sea extending over an hundred 
j fojanas, a lovely hill, named Pushpitaka, the abode of Siddhas 
and Ch&ranas ; resembling the rays of the sun or the moon, — 
resting on the waters of the ocean, looks splendid, piercing 
the heavens with its giant peaks. Of this (mountain), there 
is a particular golden summit, which the sun approaches. It 
is incapable of being beheld by the ungrateful or the atheisti- 
cal. Bowing your heads down unto this hill, let the monkeys 
search on. Leaving behind that irrepressible one, (ye will 
come upon) a mountain difficult of approach, extending over 
fourteen yojanas , named Suryyavin. Passing by that also, (ye 
will see) a mountain, named Vidyut, filled with trees, beauti- 
ful at all seasons, and bearing all desirable fruits. There, 
feeding upon excellent and costly fruits and roots, and 
drinking delicious honey, let the monkeys pass beyond it. 
There is the hill named Kunjara, grateful both to the eye and 
the mind, — where V^wakarmS had built the abode of 
Agastya.* There (rises) that stately golden pile, adorned 
with various gems, extending over one yojana> and ten in 
height. In it t also there is that palace, which is the abode of 
snakes; having spacious ways, incapable of being captured, 
guarded around, and protected by dreadful snakes and sharp- 
toothed serpents of virulent poison ; where dwelleth V&suki, 
the exceedingly terrible king of snakes. Proceeding heed- 
fully, ye must explore that Bhogavati palace ; as also whatever 
concealed places may lie there. Going beyond that place, 
(ye will see) the mighty mountain named Rhrishava, in the 
form of a bull, full of all gems, and possessed of grace,— 
where are produced excellent Gogirshaka, Padmaka , and 
Haricydma sandals, and which in effulgence resembles fire. 
But, seeing that sandal, ye must by no means ask any 
questions : certain Gandharbas, named Rohitas, are on guard 
over that wood — the lords of Gandharbas, in splendour like 

* #. e. in that hill . 

t i. e. in that hill. 



8 1 6 



XAAIAI'ANA. ’ 



unto five suns, — Cailusha, Gramani, Cikslia, Cuka, and Babhru. 
After that, (Rhishava), at the extremity of the Earth is the 
abode of persons of pious acts, whose bodies are composed of 
the Sun, the Moon and Fire. And there reside persons who 
have won the heavenly regions. After that are the awful 
regions of the ancestral manes, which ye must not ap- 
proach. This is the metropolis of Yama, covered by deep 
gloom. Ye heroic monkey chiefs, ye can seek thus far. 
Further there is no course for those endeued with 
motion. Having examined all these, as well others that may 
come within your ken, it behoves you, after having ascertained 
Vaidehi’s course, to return ihither). He that, returning with- 
in a month, shall say, — “I have seen Sit5,' shall pass his days 
in happiness, enjoying affluence like mine own and indulg- 
ing all pleasures. He shall be dearer unto me than life itself, 
and none dearer (unto me) than he ; and although he might 
commit innumerable wrongs, still should he become my friend. 
Possessed of immeasurable strength and prowess, and sprung 
from lines crowned with sterling virtues, do ye strive manfully 
in such a glorious way that the king's daughter may be 
recovered .” 



SECTION X L 1 1 . 



Having despatched those monkeys in a southern direc- 
tion, Sugriva spoke unto the monkey named Sushena, 
resembling a mass of clouds. Approaching his father-in-law, 
Tara’s father, possessed of dreadful prowess, the king, bowing 
and with joined hands, spoke unto him. And Sugrivt 
commanded the Maharshi’s son, MSricha, and the mighty ape, 
Archishmat, surrounded hy the heroic foremost of monkeys, — 
possessing the splendour of Mali end ra. gifted with sense 




KISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 817 

rod vigor ; and resembling the offspring himself of VinatSL in 
brightness ; and Marichi's son, — the M&richas — the mighty 
Archirm£lyas, — all these sons of the saint* — (to march) towards 
the West, saying, — “Ye monkey-chiefs, let twice hundred 
thousand monkeys led by Sushena (set out) to search Vaidehi. 
Ye foremost of monkeys, do ye explore the Saurishtras, the 
Biblikas, the Chandrachitras, and (other) populous and fair 
provinces and spacious cities, and Kukshi, dense with 
Punndgas,t and filled with Vakulas and Udddlakas ; as well 
is the tracts covered with Ketaka trees ; and auspicious 
streams bearing their cool waters westward ; and the forests 
of ascetics; and mountains embosoming woods. There having 
explored tracts resembling deserts, and cold cliffs towering 
high, and the West, covered with mountain ranges, and extreme- 
ly difficult of access,— and proceeding at a little more to the 
west, it behoves you to have a view of the sea. And 
proceeding on, ye monkeys, ye shall see (the ocean), whose 
waters abound in whales and alligators, ye monkeys.J Then 
the apes shall sport in tracts covered by Ketakas , and dense 
with Totndlas and woods of cocoanuts. There shall ye 
look for Sit& and the mansion of R&vana, in hills and 
woods on the shores of the sea ; and (explore) Murachipattana, 
and the delightful Jatapura, and Avanti, and Angalapa, as 
well as in the wood (called) Alakshita, and spacious 
monarchies, and emporiums. There is a mighty mountain 
where the Sindhu falls into the sea, Somagiri by name ; 
having an hundred summits and tall trees. In its plateaus 
there are certain birds (called) Sinhas. These lift up to their 
nests whales and elephants. The proud elephants carried to 
the nests and remaining on the summits of the mountain, 



• Marichi.— T. 
f Rottleria Tinctoria. — T. 

t The grammar of these slokas is exceedingly vicious ; and it has cost the 
Translator no small amount of labor to assign the necessary logical nexus in 
a good many places. — T. 

103 





• Lit. horse- necked. — T. 
t i.e. in the Vardha hill . — T. 



' KISHRINDHXkJlNDA m. 



819 

mountains, whose sight betrays the secret of its bowels being 
freighted with gold, (ye shall come upon) the mountain 
Sarvasauvarna, furnished with fountains and cascades. Com- 
ing to it, elephants, and boars, and lions, and tigers, on all 
sides roar ceaselessly, wrought up by the echoes their own 
cries have produced. This is the mountain named Megha, 
where the graceful green-horsed vanquisher of P&ka, Mahen- 
dra, was installed king by the gods. Having passed by that 
mountain protected by Mahendra, ye shall repair to sixty 
thousand hills of gold ; in hue like the infant sun, and blazing 
on all sides and embellished by blossoming golden trees. In 
the midst of them is established as king, Meru, best of 
mountains. Formerly the Sun being well pleased, conferred 
a boon on this mountain, and he addressed the mountain, 
saying, — 'By my grace all the hills that are under thy 
protection, shall be golden day and night ; and also 
those gods Gandharbas and D£navas that shall dwell in 
thee, shall be filled with reverence for me and to the boot 
attain a golden glory.' Coming to the excellent mountain 
Meru, V^wadevas, the Vasus, the Maruts and the celestials, 
adore the Sun in the western twilight. Adored by them, the 
Sun, becoming invisible, repaireth to the Setting hill.* In 
half a muhurta , the Sun swiftly passes over this (mountain), 
measuring, as it does, ten thousand yoyanas. On its peak rises 
an edifice ; resembling the sun (in splendour) ; consisting of 
palatial mansions built by V^wakarmSl ; and graced by goodly 
trees rife with various birds, — the residence of the liigh- 
souled Varuna, bearing the noose in his hand. Between Meru 
and the Setting hill, towers a tall palm having ten heads. 
Golden and graceful, it shineth on a variegated dais. In all 
these, difficult of access, as also in rivers and tanks, ye should 
thoroughly search for Ravana along with Vaidehi. There 
dwells there the righteous and famous Merus&varni, sanctified 

* The commentator remarks : “Although not expressly stated, it is implied 
that the islands to the west of it are also to be searched.' 1 — T. 



d 





820 



RAmAYANA. 



by virtue of his own asceticism, and like unto BrahmS, himself. * 
Bowing down your heads to the earth, ye should ask the 
Maharshi Merusavarni, resembling the sun, touching MithilS's 
daughter. On the departure of night, the sun dispells the 
darkness of the world to this extent, and then enters the Set- 
ting hill. Ye foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are able to 
proceed thus far. Beyond this, of what is sunless and bound- 
less 1 know nothing. Having come to Vaidehi and RSvana's 
mansions, and arrived at the Setting-hill, do ye return on the 
month being complete. Ye must not stay above a month ; and 
if ye do, ye must be slain by me. And along with you goeth 
that hero, my father-in-law. Ye, abiding by his orders, 
should listen to all that he sayeth. My mighty-armed father- 
in-law. gifted with great strength, is my spiritual preceptor. 
All of you possessed of prowess, yourselves certainly consti- 
tute the measure whereby to ascertain the wisdom or 
otherwise of a course. Making this one also into a measure, 
survey the western quarter. Having requited the good that 
hath been done to us, we shall attain our end. De ye also 
determine what else is agreeable (unto Rlma), and in 
consonance with place, season and profit, should be performed 
by you in the matter of this business.” Then those monkeys— 
the monkey-chiefs headed by Sushena, having heard Sugriva’s 
deft speech, set out for the quarter protected by Varuna. 



SECTION XL. V II . 



Having directed his father-in-law to proceed to the 
West, that best of monkeys, the all-knowing king Sugrira, 
lord of apes, then spake unto the heroic monkey, named 
Satavala, words fraught with good unto himself as well as 



Like unto Praj&pati dwelling by Mah&meru. — T. 




KISHKINDHlKlNDAM. 



821 



unto Rama, — “Surrounded by hundreds and thousands of 
rangers of the forest like thyself, in company with the 
offspring of Yama as well as the counsellors in a body, do 
thou, O thou possessed of prowess, entering the northern 
quarter furnished with the Hima 9aila, search every- 
where for the illustrious spouse of Rama. — Having performed 
this task satisfactorily, and brought about what is dear unto 
Da^aratha’s son, we shall, O best of those that achieve suc- 
cess, be freed from our debts. The high-souled RSghava hath 
done us good. If we can serve him in turn, our life shall be 
crowned with success. Even the life of him that accomplishes 
the work of one to whom the former is not obliged, is 
successful, — what then is to be said in respect of him that hath 
served one formerly ? Pondering this, those that are engaged 
in our welfare, should so act that Janaki may be discovered. 
And this formemost of men is worthy of being honored by 
all creatures ; and Rama — captor of hostile capitals — hath 
also found delight in us. Endowed with sense and prowess, 
do ye explore these many inaccessible places, rivers and 
mountains. Having searched there Mlechahhas, Pulindas, 
Sura senas, Prasthalas, Bharatas, Kurus, and Madrakas, and 
Varadas, as well as the cities of KSmbojas, Yavanas and 
Sakas, do ye explore Himav£n. And in tracts of Lodhras and 
Padmakas, and in DevadSLru woods* do ye search thoroughly 
for Ravana along with Videha's daughter. Then, coming 
upon the hermitage of Soma, frequented by gods and Gan- 
dharbas, do ye repair to the mountain called Kala possessing 
spacious plateaus. In those mighty mountains, as also in 
others and in their caves, do ye search for that exalted lady, 
the blameless wife of Rama. Having passed beyond that 
mighty mountain containing gold in its womb, it behoves 
you to go to the mountain called Sudar£ana. Then (lies) 
the mountain called DevasakhH, the home of feathered tribes; 
abounding in various fowls, and embellished with diverse trees. 

• Belonging, according to the commentator, to Himavdn. — T. 





82 2 



rAmAvana. 



In its golden tracts, fountains and caves, do ye search for 
Rlvana along with Videha’s daughter. Going beyond it, 
(ye come upon) a vacant land, measuring an hundred Yoyanto % 
without mountains, or rivers, or trees ; and void of all living 
beings. Speedily passing that desert land capable of making 
one’s hair stand on end, ye shall feel delighted, on coming 
to the pale Kailua. There (ye will behold) the charming 
mansion of Kuvera, resembling pale clouds, of burnished gold, 
built by Vi9wakarma ; where (lies) the spacious tank over* 
flowing with lotuses and lilies, thronged with swans and 
Karandavas, and frequented by troops of Apsarls. There 
king Vai^ravana, the lord of Yakshas, bowed down unto by 
all creatures, — the graceful giver of riches — sporteth along 
with the Guhyakas. In the offshoots belonging to KailSfa 
resembling the moon,as also in their caverns, do ye thoroughly 
search for RSLvana in company with Vaidehi. And coming to 
the Krauncha mountain, ye should, having your wits about yon, 
enter its inaccessible cavern ; for that is well known as diffi- 
cult of entrance. There dwell certain Maharshis, high-soo)ed, 
of effulgence resembling that of the sun— complete god-like 
shapes, — who are sought by the deities themselves. And ye 
should thoroughly explore the other caves of Krauncha, if* 
plateaus and peaks ; its passes and sides. (Then is) the tree- 
less M&nasa — abode of birds — the scene of K&ma's austerities. 
Way there is none for creatures, or for gods, or for R&kshasas. 
That also must be explored by you, — that mountain with 
plains and plateaus. Going beyond Krauncha, (ye shall see) 
the mountain, named Mainaka. There is the residence of the 
Danava, Maya, reared by himself. Main&ka also with its 
plains, plateaus and woods must be searched by you. There 
are all over, the homes of females with faces resembling those 
of horses. Going beyond that part, (ye shall come to) the 
asylum inhabited by Siddhas ; where are ascetics — V&lakhilyas, 
Siddhas and VaikhSnasas. Saluting those Siddhas, who have 
been cleansed of their sins on account of their asceticism! ye 




K l SH KIND Hi Kk IV DA M. 823 

hould in bumble guise ask them concerning Sitff. There is 
he VaikMtnasa tank filled with golden lotuses ; and ranged 
ay graceful cranes of the hue of the infant sun. Kuvera's 
rebicle, the elephant known (by the name of) S&rvabhauma, 
ever rangeth that country in company with she-elephants. 
Going beyond that expanse of water, (ye come upon) a sky 
void of staife, and where the sun and the moon have been put 
oat ; and that land is visible by the rays, as if of the sun, 
proceeding from (the persons of) self-luminous, god-like ones, 
who are reposing there, after achieving success in austerities. 
Leaving behind that region, (you come to) a stream named 
Sailodff. On its both banks are bamboos named Kichaka. 
These take the Siddhas to the other shore and bring them 
back again. There (are seen) the northern Kurus, the abode 
of those that have acquired religious merit. And there are 
tanks there with their waters crowned with golden lotuses. 
There are rivers by thousands with copious blue lapis leaves. 
And the pools here, resembling the tender sun, are embellished 
with assemblages of golden red lotuses. And that tract is every 
where filled with costly gems, and jewels, and woods of blue 
lotuses, having filaments splendid like gold ; and with round 
pearls and costly jewels. And the rivers there have islets 
covered with gold ; and are crowded with lovely hills of gold, 
bright as fire,furnished with all kinds of precious stones. And 
the trees there, thronged with birds, bear flowers and fruits 
iaily ; and, charged with savoury juices, publishing superb 
perfumes, and of delicious feel, they confer every wish. Other 
excellent trees bring forth attires of divers kinds, and orna- 
nents decked with pearls and lapises,— coveted alike by males 
ind females*. And other excellent trees bear fruits fit to be 
partaken at all seasons. And other excellent trees bring forth 
>recious beds dight with costly jewels and furnished with 

• The present text, according to Kataka, drops a sloka, whose last line is, 
Beings possessed of powerful effulgence, sport here always in company with 
anales.”— T. 





824 



RlMlTANA. 



variegated covers. And other trees bring forth charming 
wreaths, and costly drinks, and various kinds of viands. And 
females adorned with every accomplishment, and endowed 
with youth and beauty, and Gandharbas and Kinnaras, and 
Siddhas and N£gas and Vidy&dharas, of blazing splendour, 
ceaselessly sport there in company with females. And all of 
righteous deeds, and all engaged in amorous disports, and all 
furnished with desire and profit, — dwell in that place in asso- 
ciation with their females. And there are continually heard 
there the sounds of instruments and the voice of song mixed 
with sweet hilarous laughter, capable of taking all creatures. 
No one is depressed there ; nor doth any one there want any 
desirable object ; and day after day the delightful qualities find 
their developement there. Passing beyond that is the Northern 
ocean. In the bosom (of the deep) is the mountain named 
Somagiri, golden and of great dimensions. Albeit without the 
sun, yet through the brightness of the Soma mountain, the 
land shines forth with all the loveliness and reality of one 
warmed by the sun. There that Soul of the Universe, the 
adorable Sambhu, fraught with the spirits of the eleven 
Rudras — that lord of the gods — BrahmS. — dwelletb, surrounded 
by the Brah marsh is. Ye cannot proceed to the north of the 
Kurus ; nor is there way in that region for any other crea- 
tures. And that mountain is named Soma, incapable of being 
entered even by the gods. Sighting this, you should speedily 
turn back. Ye foremost of monkeys, the monkeys are com- 
petent to proceed thus far. Beyond that, of regions sunless 
and limitless I know nothing. Ye should search all these 
which I have described iunto you) ; and ye should also turn 
your attention to others besides, which I have omitted to 
mention. Ye that are comparable unto the wind or fire, by 
accomplishing the work of beholding Videha’s daughter, ye 
will do what is held as exceedingly dear unto Dataratha’s 
son as well as highly grateful to me. Then, having achieved 
success, do ye, along with your friends, honored by me, and 




KISH KIN DH A K A ND A M. 



825 

rrowned with every virtue, ye monkeys, with your enemies 
tlaio, range the earth in company with your wives, — the sup- 
port of all beings.” 



SECTION X L I V . 



SuGRIVA had declared his conviction that lie relied parti- 
cularly upon Hanuman. And convinced as to the ability 
of that best of monkeys to accomplish the work, Sugriva, 
that lord of all the dwellers of the woods, well pleased, spoke 
unto HanumSn, son unto the wind-god, saying , — “O 
Foremost of monkeys, neither on the earth, nor in the sky,* 
nor in the etherial regions, t nor yet in water, find I anj^ 
obstacle to thy course. The entire worlds with- Asutas, and 
Gaudharbas, and Nagas, and men, and gods, wkh o'cdansf, 
and the earth and the regions beneath — are well known lintd 
thee. And thy motion, vehemence, energy and fleetness; 
are, O hero, O mighty ape, even like those of thy sire, the 
powerful wind-god ; and there exists no creature on earth 
that is like unto thee in energy. Therefore do thou bethink 
thee how Sit 3. may be recovered. Even in thee, O thou 
versed in policy, are strength, and wit, and courage, and 
policy, and conduct in consonance with season and place.” 
Thereat, understanding that success in the task depended 
upon Hanumln, and also knowing what Hanuman was, 
R&ghava reflected, — ‘‘This lord of monkeys is every way 
:onfident concerning Hanuman ; and Hanum&n himself is 
:ven more confident of achieving succes in the work. He 
Jiat hath been tested by his deed, and who hath been consi- 
lered worthiest by his master, having been commissioned 
n this business, — success in the work is certain.” Then 

• A ntariksha — regions above the earth in which the birds fly. — T. 

t -twnrara— Upper air. 



104 



126 



ItlMAKANA. 



beholding that mo ikey who was the fittest for the task, that 
exceedingly energetic one, (Rama), with his mind and senses 
exhilarated, considering himself as already crowned with 
success, felt the excess of joy. And well pleased, that 
subduer of enemies handed to Hanuman a ring inscribed 
with his name, as a sign unto the king’s daughter. “By this 
sign, O foremost of monkeys, Janaka’s daughter will be able 
to see thee fearlessly, as one that hath come from me. Thy 
firmness, O hero, and sterling prowess, as well as Sugriva’s 
saying, tell me greatly of success.” Thereupon, taking that 
(ring), and raising his joined palms to his head, that foremost 
and best of monkeys, saluting (R&ma’s) feet, went away. 
Then taking with him that mighty host of monkeys, that 
hero, the son of the wind, resembled the moon of bright 
disc in the sky, garnished by the stars, after the clouds have 
departed. “O thou of excessive strength ! I take refuge 
in thy might. O thou endowed with the prowess of the 
foremost of lions ! do thou, O son of the Wind, O Hanumin, 
exert thyself so, summoning the great strength thou art 
master of, that we may obtain Janaka’s daughter.”* 



SECTION X L V . 

{Summoning all the monkeys, that foremost of monkeys, 
king Sugriva, spake unto them all touching the success of 
Rama’s work. “The monkey-chiefs, knowing the stern 
command of their lord, should search in all these places.” 
Then, covering up the earth like locusts, they marched away. 
Expecting tidings of Sit5, RSma remained that month in 
the vicinity of that cascade, in company with Lakshmana. 
And that heroic monkey Satavali swiftly set out for the 

* The commentator says that this speech is equally attributable to Rlma 
and Sugriva. But I think, it would fit Rama’s lips to a nicety— -T. 





KISHKlNDHlKANDA Ji. 



«27 



northern regions covered by the monarch of mountains. 
And that leader of monkey herds, Vinata, proceeded towards 
the eastern quarter. And that monkey, Hanum£n — leader 
of monkey-herds — in company with Tara, Angada and 
Others, went to the South, inhabited by Agastya. And that 
lord of monkeys, Sushena, lion among monkeys, went to the 
terrible western quarter, protected by Varuna. Then, having 
properly despatched (his forces) in all directions, that general 
of the monkey hosts, being pleased, gave himself up to sport. 
Thus despatched by the king, the monkey-chiefs proceeded 
apace respectively towards their destined quarters. And 
the monkeys possessed of great strength cried and howled 
and roared and shouted and rushed and sent up loud ululation9. 
Thus despatched by the king, the leaders of monkey-herds, 
said, “We f hall bring back Sit Si, and slay Ravana. I alone 
shall slay Ravana engaged in conflict. And slaying (him), 
I shall this very day swiftly carry off Janaka's daughter, 
trembling because of fatigue, (saying unto her), ‘Rest thou/ 
I single-handed shall recover Janaki even from the nether 
regions. I shall uproot trees and rive mountains. I shall 
cleave the earth and vex the deep.” (And some said), “I can, 
without doubt, clear a Yojana at one bound and another 
said, “I can clear an hundred ;** and a yet another, “I can 
more than an hundred. And neither on earth, nor in sea, 
mountains, woods, nor nether regions, can my course be 
obstructed .’ 1 Thus did the apes proud of their strength, 
severally speak in presence of the sovereign of the monkeys. 



SECTION X L V I . 



On the monkey-chiefs having departed, R&ma said unto 
Sugriva, — “How is it that thou knowest all the quarters of 
this earth ?” Thereupon, the self-controlled Sugriva, bowing 




8jS 



RAmAi'A na. 



low, said unto Rama, — ‘‘Do thou listen to my words. I shalf 
relate everything. When Vali pursued the Danava Dunduvi,* 
wearing the form of a buffalo, towards the Malaya mountain ^ 
Mahisha entered a cave of that mountain. And Vali also,desir — 
ous of sla)ing the A sura, entered Malaya. And I was made 
to stand at the mouth in humble guise ; nor did VSli issue out, 
although a good year rolled away. Then the cave became filled 
with blood gushing out vehemently. Seeing this, I became 
amazed, and exercised with the poison of grief on account of 
my brother. And I, losing my sense, thought that my superior 
had for certain been slain. And I placed a crag huge as a 
hill at the mouth of the cave. (And thought I), ‘Mahisha, 
unable to issue out, needs must meet his end.* And despair* 
ing of his (V&li’s) life, I retraced my steps to KishkindM. 
And obtaining the spacious kingdom along with T&rft and 
Uma, I began to pass my days in peace in company with 
his counsellors. Then came that foremost of monkeys, having 
slain him (Mahisha). Thereupon, I, influenced by fear, in 
consideration of his dignity, made over to him his monarchy. 
But Vali, his senses exercised with sorrow, anxious to slay 
me, in company with his counsellors, pursued me, who 
took to my heels. Hotly pursued and chased by Vftli, 

1 surveyed various streams and woods and cities. And 
I surveyed the earth like the hoof-print of a cow, or the 
image reflected from a mirror, or a fire-brand whirled (in the 
air.jt Then repairing to the East, I see various trees, and 
mountains, and charming caves, and diverse tanks. And there 
I behold the Ascending mountain decked with gold, — and that 
daily abode of Apsaras — the sea of milk. And chased by 

* The real name of this DAnava is m:\yAvi. lie is confusedly called DundaTi 
and Mahisha.the latter, in consequence of the implication that his father having 
assumed the shape of a buffalo, he has also a like shape. — T. 

t The commentator remarks that “like the hoof-print of a cow" exprrsMi 
the ease with which Sugriva travelled the earth ; "like a Are brand whirM* 
conveys his vehement speed ; and "like the image reflected on a mirror" signi- 
fies the lucidity of his perception. — T. 




K1SHIUNDHX KIND A M 



8*9 



Y&li, and flying on, I suddenly veered round, and then again, 
0 master, off I went. And changing that direction, I again 
made for the South crowded with trees belonging to Vindhya, 
and embellished with sandal woods. Then seeing Vali in the 
mountain among trees, from the south I, pursued by Vali, 
betook myself to the western quarter. And beholding various 
countries, and arriving at that foremost and best of mountains — 
Asta* — I turned to the north j and (passed) Ilimavat, and 
Meru, and the Northern sea. But pursued by Vali, refuge 
find I none. Then out spake Hanuman endeued with under- 
standing, ‘O king, now I remember me how that lord of 
monkeys, Vali, was cursed by Matanga in this very hermitage. 
If Vali enters (into this asylum), his head becomes cleft in 
hundred. There we shall dwell happily without anxiety/ O 
king’s son, thereupon, we went to the Rhisyamuka mountain, 
nor did then Vali enter there from fear of Matanga. Thus, 

0 king, did I actually see all the world. And from that place 

1 came to this cave/' 



SECTI ON X LVI I . 



The principal monkeys, having been ordered by the 
monkey-king, speedily went in all directions to their destina- 
tions for the purpose of seeing Vaidehi. And on all sides they 
explore watery expanses, and streams, and lawns, and com- 
mons, and cities, and tracts rendered impassable by torrents. 
And the leaders of monkey-herds search all those countries, 
described by Sugriva,— containing mountains, woods and 
forests. Engaged during the day in search of Sit§, at 
night the monkeys seek the ground (for sleep). In every 
place, by day coming to trees aye enjoying every season, 
and crowned with fruits, the monkeys prepared their beds at 



The .Getting hill. — T. 





83 ° 



Hi Mir AN A. 



night* Counting that dayt as the first, the principal 
monkeys, after the month had run out, resigning all hope, 
came to the Fountain and met with the monkey-king. And 
having explored the Eastern regions, as directed, the exceed- 
ingly strong Vinata not having been able to see Sit3, came 
back, in company with his counsellors. And then that mighty 
ape, Satavali, daunted in spirits, arrived with his forces, after 
having searched all through the North. And having search- 
ed the West in company with his monkeys, Sushena, on the 
month being complete, presented himself before Sugriva. 
And coming to Sugriva seated along with R§ma behind the 
Fountain, and saluting the former, Sushena said unto Sugriva, 
— “Searched have been all the mountains, and deep woods, 
and streams, and islands embosomed in the ocean, and the 
various provinces. And also searched have been all the caves 
which have been described by thee ; and searched have been 
all the groves entertwined with plants ; and thickets ; and 
difficult and uneven grounds. And huge animals have been 
sought out and slain (by us). And all the impracticable places 
we have explored again and again. O lord of monkeys, 
possessed of great strength and nobly born, it is Hanumftn 
who will be able to ascertain the whereabouts of Mithill's 
daughter. And the Wind’s son, HanumSn, hath followed even 
the path by which Sit 5. hath gone.” 



SECTION XLVIII . 



jt he monkey Hanum&n in company with T£r& and Angada 
swiftly set out for the quarter assigned by Sugriva. And 
having proceeded far along with all those foremost of monkeyii 

* The sense is rather obscure, it being difficult to understand the rebtifl 
their beds bore toHhe neighbouring trees. — T. 
t i.e. the day of their departure.— T. 



KlSHKlNDHkKlNDA M. 83 1 

he explored the caves and woods of Vindhya; spots inaccessible 
in consequence of streams intervening in front of mountains ; 
and tanks ; and tracts filled with trees ; and various mountains 
rife with wild trees. And having searched in all directions, 
the monkeys could not find Maithili, Janaka’s daughter 
SiUL And subsisting on various fruits and roots, they were 
overcome with fatigue, after searching dreadful forests, void 
of water, still and tenantless, as well as other forests of a 
similar nature. And having searched that country as well 
mighty forests containing caves, those leaders of monkey- 
herds fearlessly explored other places, difficult of access, 
where the trees are fruitless, and without flowers and foliage ; 
where the streams are waterless, and where roots even are 
rare; where there are no buffaloes, or deer, or elephants, or 
tigers, or birds — or any other animals that are found in forests. 
And there are there neither trees, nor annual plants, nor 
creepers, nor herbs, — and in that place there are no pleasant 
pools, with cool leaves, and filled with blown lotuses ; and it 
hath been renounced by the black-bees. There dwelleth a 
Maharshi, Kandu by name, an eminently pious, and truthful 
ascetic, irascible, and irrepressible because of his practice of 
self-discipline. In that wood his son, a boy of ten years, 
his sands having run out, breathed his last ; and it is for this 
that the mighty ascetic hath come under the influence of 
passion. And cursed by that high-souled one, the entire 
mighty forest hath become unfit to harbour (any creatures); 
difficult of entrance ; and devoid of birds and beasts. They* 
carefully search the skirts of its woods, mountain-caves, and 
the sources of its streams. And those high-souled ones, 
devoted to the good of Sugriva, did not find Janaka’s daughter, 
or her ravisher, Rlvana. And entering 'into a wood), they saw 
a terrible Asura, concealed by the shrubs and plants — of dread- 
ful deeds, and cherishing no fear even of the gods. And 
seeing that dreadful Asura, seated like a hill, and resembling 



* i.e. the monkeys. 





8 3 2 



rXmAfana. 



a mountain, they all tightened their cloths. And that strong 
one also, saying unto the monkeys, “Destroyed are ye,” and 
uplifting his clenched fist, rushed after them in rage. AuJ 
as he darted suddenly, Angada, the son of V&li, knowing, 
“This is Ravana,” administered unto him a slap. Struck by 
Vali’s son, that Asura, his mouth vomitting blood, fell down 
to the earth like a hill toppled down. And on his having 
breathed his last, the monkeys, elated with victory, thoroughly 
searched that mountain cavern. And when they had satisfied 
themselves that the cave had been searched all through, the 
dwellers of the woods entered another fearful mountain cavern. 
And after having searched (that place; also, they came out 
fatigued; and with desponding hearts sat them down at ft 
distance under the shade of a tree. 



SECTION x Li x • 



JLhen the eminently wise Angada, fatigued, spake unto 
all the monkeys, cheering them, — “Woods, and mountains, 
and rivers, and impenetrable wilds, and valleys, and 
mountain caverns have been thoroughly searched. But Jlnaki 
we have failed to find anywhere, — or that wicked wight, the 
Rakshasa that hath ravished SitSL And we have spent ft 
great part of the term that had been assigned by Sugnva of 
stern commands. Therefore, banishing languor, sadness, and 
invading drowsiness, do ye together search all round. Do 
ye so search Sitft, that she may be found out (by us). High 
spirits, ability and forwardness in action, are said to conduce 
to success. Therefore it is that I speak thus unto you. Ye 
dwellers of the wood, do ye to day rummage this impenetra- 
ble wood ; renouncing grief, do ye again search through this 
forest. Those who act, for certain behold the fruit of their 
endeavours; but if people once give way to grief, they cannot 




KISHKlNDHlKXNLAM. 



833 



again attain vigor. Ye monkeys, king Sugriva is irascible; 
and inflicteth sharp punishments. He should be always feared, 
as also the magnanimous Rama. I tell you this for your 
good. Act accordingly, if ye list. And do ye also express 
what else ye are capable of/' Hearing Angada’s words 
GandhamSdana said in candid words faint from thirst and 
fatigue, — “What Angada hath said unto us is worthy of him, 
and is beneficial and good. Do you follow his speech. Let 
us afresh search hills, caves and rocks, vacant forests and 
mountain cascades, — in accordance with what the high-souled 
Sugriva hath laid down. Let all in a body rummage the 
wood, and the mountain caverns.” There rising up, the 
mighty monkeys again began to range the South close with 
forests belonging to Vindhya. And the monkeys ascended 
the Silvern Hill resembling the autumnal welkin, graceful, 
and furnished with summits and valleys. And eager to behold 
Sita, those excellent monkeys began to search the Lodhra 
wood, and the Saptaparna forests. And ascending its top* 
those ones endeued with immense prowess, experiencing 
fatigue, could not find Vaidehi, the beloved spouse of Rama. 
And having surveyed that hill having many a grot, so far 
as the eye could range, the monkeys looking all round, 
descended (the eminence). And having descended to the 
earth, the monkeys, bewildered, and losing their conscious- 
ness, rested for a while at the foot of a tree. And their 
fatigue having gone off a little, the monkeys, having been 
refreshed for a while, again prepared to explore the whole 
South. And the monkey chiefs, headed by Hanuman, having 
set out (on the search), began to range all through Vindhya. 



♦ #. e. the top of the Silvern Hill.— T. 



105 



d 



834 



rImXvana. 



SECTION L. 



1h E monkey, Hanuman, in company with Tflra and Angada 
searcheth the caves and woods of Vindhya, — caverns all 
around haunted by lions and tigers, and in vast inaccessible 
cascades in that foremost of mountains. And they came 
to the south-western summit of the mountain. And when 
they sojourned there, their (appointed) term had not expired. 
And that spacious country, consisting as it did, of caves and 
grots and woods, was difficult to search. And there the 
wind-god's offspring searched all over the mountain. And 
each apart remaining at no great distance from the others, 
Gaya, Gavakha and Gavaya, Sarava, Gandham&dana, Maindi, 
Dwivida, and HanumSn, Jambav&n, the youthful prince 
Angada, and Tara, remaining in sight of the wood, after 
having searched the South — lands covered with mountain 
ranges, were searching (about), when they espied an 
unenclosed cavity, difficult of entry, named Vrikshavila, 
guarded by a Danava. And tried by hunger and thirst, worn 
out with fatigue, seeking for water, they found that cavity 
surrounded by trees and plants. And, with their bodies 
drenched and reddened with lotus dust, Kraunchas aud swans 
and cranes and Chakravikas, came out of the cavity. And 
drawing nigh to that fragrant and inaccessible cave, those 
superior monkeys were struck with amaze, and became eager 
(to enter into it;. And with their minds filled with doubt, those 
vigorous foremost of monkeys gladly approached that cave; 
abounding in diverse animals, resembling the residence of 
the lord of Dailyas,* dazzling, and dreadful, and impenetrable 
on all sides. — Then Hanuman the son of the wind-god, 
possessed of the splendour of a mountain-summit, cognizant 
of woods and forests, said unto the grim-visaged apes, 



t. «*. the subterranean regions. — T. 



KISHKINDHXkA nd a m. 



835 



^Having explored the South, (containing) countries enveloped 
with mountain chains, we have ail got fatigued, but we 
have failed to iind Mithil&’s daughter. And from yonder 
cave come out swarms of swans and cranes and kraunchas 
and chtkravdkas , drenched with water. For certain here 
is a well or a watery expanse. And at the mouth of 
the cave there are these cool trees.'* Hanuman having 
said this, all the monkeys went into the cave covered 
with darkness ; without the sun or the moon, capable of 
making one’s down stand on end. And seeing lions, and 
birds and beasts (ranging around), those tiger-like monkeys 
entered that cave covered with darkness. And (there) neither 
their ken, nor their vigor, nor yet their prowess was baffled : 
and their speed resembled the wind, and their sight remained 
unimpaired albeit in darkness. And those foremost of 
monkeys rushed into the cavity ; and beheld displayed (before 
them) ait excellent and charming scene. And embracing 
each other in that fearful cave rife with various trees, they 
passed over an hundred yoyanas . And deprived of their 
sense, and tried with thirst, and bewildered, and thirsting for 
water, they for a time vigilantly descended in darkness down 
the cave. And emaciated, with woc-begone faces, and spent, 
those monkeys despairing of their lives, (at last) saw light. 
And those mild ones, coming to a spot free from darkness, 
saw golden trees, possessed of the brightness of flaming fire. 
And S&las and palms, and Tamilas, Punnagas, Vanjulas, and 
Dhavas, Champakas, Naga trees, KaniikSras in flower; with 
variegated golden bunches and twigs, and crests of clusters, 
and plants, — embellished with golden garniture; resembling the 
infantine sun,— on daises composed of lapises ; — golden trees 
with resplendent bodies, having the hues of purple lapises; 
and lotus-plants flocked with fowls ; and (spots) surrounded 
by large golden trees, like unto the infantine sun ; and tanks 
with large Ashes of gold and lotuses, containing pleasant 
waters — all these they saw there. And the monkeys saw 




§ 3 ^ 



a Am A van a. 



there golden as well asLsilvern vehicles, and elegant dwellings 
all round veiled with nets of pearls; having golden balconys ; 
with their grounds paved with gold and silver ; and furnished 
with lapis lazulis. And on all sides they saw trees bearing 
fruits and flowers resembling coral ; and golden black 
bees, and honey all round, and various spacious seats 
and beds about dight with gold and jewels. And search- 
ing in that cave, the exceedingly effulgent heroic 
monkeys saw heaps of golden, silver and bell-metal vessels; 
and heaps of excellent aguru and sandal ; and pure fruits 
and roots ; and costly vehicles and various kinds of sapid 
honey; and loads of costly attire; and lots of variegated 
woolen cloths and dcer-skins ; as well as a female, from near. 
And they found her there, wearing a black deerskin,— 
a female ascetic, with restrained fare — as if flaming in 
energy. Amazed, the monkeys sat them down in a body. 
And then Hanuman asked her, — ‘‘Who art thou ? And to 
whom doth this cave belong ?” And HanumSn like unto a 
hill, bowing down unto the old women with joined hands, 
asked her, saying, — ‘Who art thou? And tell me, to whom 
belong this edifice and the cave as well as all these jewels” 



SECTION LI. 



JIaving said this unto that female clad in a piece ol 
black deer-skin, Hanuman asked that highly religious ascetic 
practising pious offices, “Having rashly entered this cave 
enveloped in gloom, we have been exercised with hunger and 
thirst ; and are extremely faint. And, having entered this 
mighty cave underneath the earth, we have become thirsty. 
And. seeing ail these wonderful phenomena, we have become 
afflicted, and bewildered ; and have lost our sense. To whom 
belong these golden trees resembling the infantine sun ; and 




K1SHK1NDHA KANDA Af. 



»37 



the pure fruits and roots ; and the houses and vehicles of 
gold and silver, — veiled in networks of jewels, and furnished 
with golden windows ? And by whose energy are these 
golden trees (here', bearing flowers, crowned with fruits, 
grateful to the sight, and breathing rich odour ? And golden 
lotuses spring in lucent water, — how golden fishes are dis- 
covered in it along with tortoises ! Have these sprung from 
thy power; or do they owe their existence to the ascetic 
energy of any other ? It behoves thee to relate all this unto 
us who are ignorant of everything." Thus addressed by 
Hanuman, the female ascetic practising righteousness, and 
engaged in the welfare of all beings, replied unto HanumSn,— 
“O foremost of monkeys, there is one, named Maya, spreader 
of illusions. By him hath this entire golden grove been 
constructed through his wonderful power of construction. He 
that hath reared this excellent golden grove, and this charm- 
ing mansion, was formerly the Vicwakarma* of the principal 
Danavas. Having for a thousand years practised austerities 
in this vast foiest, he obtained a boon from the Great-father, — 
in virtue of which he had attained consummate mastery in 
his art, as well as absolute control over the materials required 
therein. Having accomplished everything, that powerful one, 
commanding every enjoyment, for a time happily dwelt in 
this mighty forest. Then he, happening to conceive a passion 
for an ApsarS, HemSL (by name), PurandarSL, vigorously wielding 
his thunder-bolt, struck him dead. Then BrahmS conferred on 
Hem§. this fine forest and this golden mansion, with the per- 
petual privilege of enjoying every pleasure herein. I, Sayam- 
prabhSL by name, — the daughter of MerusSvarni, guard 
this house of Hema, O foremost of monkeys. Hem5, skilled 
in dance and song, is my dear friend. Having received her 
blessing, I guard this vast forest. What is thy errand ? And 
why is it that ye have arrived at these lone woods ? And 
how have you managed to see this inaccessible forest ? 



* The name of the celestial architect. — T. 





838 



rAaiafana. 



Having partaken of these fruits and roots intended for use, 
and drunk, do ye detail all this to me. 1 ' 



SECTION L 1 1 • 

:oo:— 

Then to all the monkey-chiefs, after they had rested, the 
female ascetic, engaged in righteous practices, eagerly said 
these words, — “Ye monkeys, if your pain hath gone off in 
consequence of the fare of fruits which you have partaken, 
and also if it be fit to be heard by me, I would listen to your 
narration.” Hearing her words, Hanum&n, the son of the 
wind-god, in all candour began to relate everything faithfully. 
“The Sovereign of all this world, resembling Mahendra or 
Varuna, R&ma, the graceful son of Da£aratha, entered the 
woods of Dandaka, in company with his brother, Lakshmana, 
as well as his spouse, Vaidehi. His wife hath been forcibly 
—carried off by Ravana. His friend is that heroic king, the 
monkey named Sugriva. By that monarch of the foremost 
monkeys have we been despatched (hither'. And we have, 
joining company with these prime monkeys headed by 
Angada, come to the South, protected by Yama, and 
inhabited by Agastya. And we have been commissioned, ‘Do 
ye all search for the Rakshasa Ravana, wearing forms at will, 
along with Videha’s daughter, Siti.’ Having searched through 
the forest as well as the ocean on the South, we, becoming 
hungry, sat down at the foot of a tree. And with pallid 
countenances, we all, absorbed in thought, sank in a wide sea 
of anxiety, which we could not cross. And casting our eyes 
around, wc spyed a huge cave covered with trees and plants 
and enveloped in gloom. And (it came to pass that) from 
this (cave) came out swans, drenched with water, with 
drops of water on their wings, — and plumed kuravas and 
cranes. 'Let us enter here’, said 1 unto the monkeys. And 




KISH KIN DBA KlNDA M 



839 



they also arrived at that conclusion * And thereupon they, 
bestirring themselves, entered into the cave. And firmly 
griping each other’s hands, they at once made entry into 
the cave covered with darkness. This is our errand ; and it 
is on this job that we have come. And having come to thee, 
hungry and exhausted, we, who had been sore tried by hunger, 
have been entertained with fruits and roots, agreeably 
to the code regulating hospitality. And as thou hast 
saved the monkeys, who were weary and suffering from 
hunger, tell (me), — what benefit shall the monkeys do thee 
in return ?” Thus addressed by the apes, the all-knowing 
SayamprabhS replied unto the monkey-chiefs, saying, — ‘‘Well 
pleased am I with the fast-footing monkeys. But by one 
engaged in my duties, there is no work that is desiderated.” 
Thus accosted in excellent words fraught with asceticism and 
righteousness, Hanuman spoke unto that one of faultless 
eyes, saying, — “We all take refuge in thee, practising piety. 
The term that had been fixed by the high-souled Sugriva in 
respect of us, shall all be spent in this cave. Therefore it 
behoveth thee to deliver us from this place. And it be- 
hoveth thee to save us, exercised with fear for Sugriva, — who, 
happening to override Sugriva’s command, shall lose our 
lives. And, further, O thou that practisest righteousness, 
great is the task that is to be performed by us. But if we 
stay here, that work of ours shall remain unaccomplished.” 
Thus addressed by Hanum&n, the ascetic said, — “Once enter- 
ing, hard it is for any one to return (hence) alive. But by 
the potency of my asceticism acquired through self-discipline, 
I shall deliver all the monkeys from this den. Ye foremost of 
monkeys, do ye close your eyes. No one is able to issue out of 
this place without closing one’s eyes.” Then they, eagerly desir- 
ous of going out, closed their sightf with their hands furnished 
with tender fingers. And the magnanimous monkeys, with 



• Namely, that water was to be found there . — T. 

f The text has nimilitah — and thus they closed their eyes. This redundant 





840 



RlMlVANA. 



their faces covered with their palms, were in the twinkling of 
an eye, liberated from the den by her. And then thfc 
pious anchoret spoke unto them there. And when they had 
come out of the fearful den, cheering them up, she said,— 
‘‘This is the fair Vindhya mountain filled with various trees and 
herbs. This is the Pra^ravana hill; and this is the great 
deep. Fair Fortune ! I go to my abode,ye foremost of monkeys.'* 
Having spoken thus, Sayamprabhi entered that captivating 
cave. 



S ECTION L I I I . 



Then they saw the ocean — abode of Varuna — shoreless, 
resounding, life with dreadful billows. Exploring the mount- 
ain fastness of Maya,* they spent the month that had been 
set by the king. Then sitting down at the foot of tb* 
Vindhya mountain, containing blossoming trees, at that timet 
those high-souled ones indulged in reflections. And behold- 
ing vernal trees bending beneath the load of flowers, and 
environed by hundreds of plants, they were inspired with 
apprehension. And each knowing that spring had appeared, 
they, the term apppointed for their task having run out, 
dropped down on the ground. Thereat, with bland words 
properly honoring the aged apes and the rest dwelling in the 
woods, that monkey having the shoulders of a lion or a bull, 
and plump and broad arms — the youthful prince Angada, 
endowed with high wisdom, spoke, — “We have come out at 
the mandate of the monarch of monkeys. While we sojourned 
in the cave, a full month had passed away, ye monkeys. 

epithet has been left out in the translation, as it would render the version ex- 
tremely awkward. — T. 

* Named Rhikshavila. — T. 

t i. e. at the beginning of winter. — T. 




KISH KIN DHlKl ND A M. 



64I 



hy do you not understand this ? We set out, engaging that our 
m of search should reach no further than the end of Kartika;* 
t that hath expired. Now, what next is to be done ? 
ving received the orders (of the king), ye, conversant with 
!ity, engaged in the welfare of your master, expert in every 
rk,incomparable in execution, and renowned in every quarter, 
re come out, commanded by the lord of monkeys. Now, 
ring failed to attain our object, we shall meet with death, 
sre is no doubt whatever about this. Who, having been 
uccessful in doing the mandate of the king of monkeys, 
oyeth ease ? Now all the rangers of the forest should fast 
death. Naturally stern, Sugriva, established as our 
ster, shall not forgive us, when we repair there, after having 
isgressed thus. Sita not having been found out, Sugriva, 
certain, shall commit this sin.f Therefore it is fit that, 
»aking our sons, and wives, and wealth, and homes, we this 
y day sit down to starve ourselves to death. Death at 
place is preferrable to the unequal punishment (we must 
it with at the hands of Sugriva). And, further, I have not 
n installed heir-apparent by Sugriva : I have been 
inkled by that foremost of kings, Rama of untiring energy. 
:ertaining enmity against me of old, the king, seeing this 
se, must be firmly determined to take my life by means of a 
ere sentence. What is the use of suffering my friends to 
k on my disaster at the last moment of my existence ? 
irefore even on this sacred shore of the sea shall I sit 
vn to starve myself.” Hearing the tender prince speak 
s, all those principal monkeys pathetically observed, — 
lgriva is harsh by nature, and R&ghava loveth his wife 
.rly. The time appointed having passed by, seeing us 
me) without attaining success in the task, and seeing us 
Ive without obtaining a sight of Vaidehi, (Sugriva) shall 
:ai ily slay us from the desire of doing what is agreeable to 



106 



* October. 
f 1. e. slay us. — T. 





840 



RlMlFANA. 



their faces covered with their palms, were in the twinkling of 
an eye, liberated from the den by her. And then the 
pious anchoret spoke unto them there. And when they had 
come out of the fearful den, cheering them up, she said,— 
“This is the fair Vindhya mountain filled with various trees and 
herbs. This is the Pra^ravana hill ; and this is the great 
deep. Fair Fortune ! I go to my abode, ye foremost of monkeys.'* 
Having spoken thus, Sayamprabhi entered that captivating 
cave. 



S ECTION LI I l . 



Then they saw the ocean — abode of Varuna — shoreless, 
resounding, rife with dreadful billows. Exploring the mount* 
ain fastness of Maya,* they spent the month that had been 
set by the king. Then sitting down at the foot of the 
Vindhya mountain, containing blossoming trees, at that timet 
those high-souled ones indulged in reflections. And behold- 
ing vernal trees bending beneath the load of flowers, and 
environed by hundreds of plants, they were inspired with 
apprehension. And each knowing that spring had appeared, 
they, the term apppointed for their task having run out, 
dropped down on the ground. Thereat, with bland words 
properly honoring the aged apes and the rest dwelling in the 
woods, that monkey having the shoulders of a lion or a bull, 
and plump and broad arms — the youthful prince Angada, 
endowed with high wisdom, spoke, — “We have come out at 
the mandate of the monarch of monkeys. While we sojourned 
in the cave, a full month had passed away, ye monkeys. 

epithet has been left out in the translation, as it would render the version ex- 
tremely awkward. — T. 

* Named Rhikshavila. — T. 

t 1. #. at the beginning of winter. — T. 




KISHKINDHTlKTlNDA m . 



843 



of his master, began to inspire him with fear.* He, 
wealthy in words, laying under contribution the second of 
the four means, t had created division among those monkeys. 
On their being divided, he (Hanuman) set about raising 
Angada's apprehension by various fear-fraught speech, refer- 
ring to punishments. “O T&r&’s son, thou art for certain more 
capable of fight than even thy sire ; and thou art also able to 
hold the monkey-kingdom as firmly as he. But, O foremost 
of monkeys, the monkeys are always inconstant in character. 
Bereft of their wives and sons, they shall not bear thy behest. 
And they shall never take to thee. This I tell thee in 
presence of all. And I will tell thee what. Thou neither 
by the virtues of conciliation, charity and the rest, nor by 
chastisement, shalt succeed in drawing to thy side this 
J&mbav2n, or Nila, or the mighty ape Suhotra, or myself. 
A strong one wronging another that is weak, can live ; 
therefore a weak person anxious for self-preservation, should 
never wrong (a strong individual). Thou considerest that this 
cave may serve for thy protectress,! having heard of it (said 
by TSra) ; but to rive the same is but light work for the 
shafts of Lakshmana. Formerly this was cleft a little by 
Indra, with his thunderbolt hurled (against it)§ j but now 
Lakshmana would pierce it like a leaf-stalk, by means of 
his keen arrows. Lakshmana hath many an iron arrow like 
Indra’s thunderbolt or that of the sky, p capable of riving even 
mountains. O subduer of enemies, soon as thou shalt set 
up here, the monkeys, making up their minds, shall forsake 
thee. Remembering their wives and sons, ever anxious 

• Touching Tdra. — T. 

t Referred to above. — T. 

% The word meaning cave is feminine in Sanskrit. — T. 

{ The commentator interprets the passage differently : “Formerly Indra did 
1 little damage herein — 1. e. merely slew Maya, the architect of the mansion.*’ 
rhis is ingenuity. I give the plain sense. — T. 

| Vajrhgani—Vajra is the thunder-bolt in the hand of Indra, and Agani — 
be thunder-bolt produced by clouds.— T. 





RlMl VAN A. 



$44 

(on account of Sugriva , pining for domestic happiness/ 
and aggrieved (at their pitiable plight), they shall 
turn their backs upon thee. Then forsaken by thy kindred 
as well as friends seeking thy welfare, thou shalt be 
struck with aflright even at a quaking blade of grass. 
If thou make head (against Sugriva), the sharpened shafts 
of Lakshmana, terrible, of exceeding impetuosity and mighty 
vehemence, and incapable of being baffled, shall be eager to 
slay thee. On the contrary, if thou in humble guise present 
thyself (before him) along with us, he shall establish thee 
in the kingdom, in consideration of thy being the next heir. 
A righteous sovereign, steady in vow, clean, and truthful 
in promise, thy uncle, who cherishes affection for thee, 
shall not by any means chastise thee. And he loves thy 
mother, and his life is for her; and she hath no other son. 
Therefore, O Angada, go along with us.” 



SECTION LV. 



H EARING HanumSn’s speech, uttered meekly, fraught with 
morality, and reflecting honor upon Sugriva, Angada said, — 
“Firmness, and mental sanctity, mercy, candour, prowess, 
and patience, are not in Sugriva. He that, while her sou 
is living, appropriateth the beloved queen of his elder brother, 
mother unto him by morality, is hated »of all beings). How 
can he that could cover up the mouth of the cave, when he 
had been desired by his brother gone on martial mission, 
to guard the same, — (how can he) know morality? Whose 
good office remembereth he who could forget the renowned 
Raghava himself of mighty deeds, after having, in the name 
of truth, taken his hand ? How can he reap religious raerit r 
that directed us to search SitS. here, from fear of Lakshmaoa, 
and not from fear of unrighteousness? What noble persoD r 




KISHK1NDHXKHNDA m. 



»45 



in especial, sprung in his race, shall any longer repose 
confidence in that impious one of unstable soul who 
bath run amuck of morality? Meritorious or otherwise, 
how can Sugriva, having installed in the kingdom me, 
son (of his enemy) and the enemy sprung in his race, — suffer 
me to live ? How can I, whose counsels have been revealed, 
who have transgressed, and who have been deprived of my 
power, repairing to Kishkindha like one forlorn and feeble, 
live? For the sake of his kingdom, Sugriva, wily, cunning 
and cruel, shall put me in solitary confinement. For me 
fasting to death is better than being confined and suffering the 
consequent misery. Do ye grant me your permision ; and 
go to your homes, ye monkeys. I vow before you, to the 
palace I will never repair. At this very spot will I fast for 
death ; as death is good for me. Bowing unto the king as 
well as unto the powerful Raghava, ye should communicate my 
well-being unto Sugriva — lord of apes — and my health and 
peace unto my mother Uma. And it behoves you also to 
console my mother, Tar3. Naturally fond of her son, 
and overflowing with tenderness, that lorn one, hearing of 
my death at this place, shall certainly renounce her life." 
Having said this, Angada, saluting the elders, with a woe- 
begone face entered the earth covered with grass. When he 
had entered, those foremost monkeys, stricken with sorrow, 
weeping shed warm tears from their eyes. And censuring 
Sugriva and praising Vali, they, surrounding Angada, deter- 
mined to starve themselves to death. Taking to heart the 
speech of VSli’s son, those prime monkeys, sipping water, 
sat down facing the East. And sitting on the edge of the 
water on grass pointing to the south, the foremost monkeys, 
wishing for surcease, thought within themselves, — “Even 
this is fit for us." And as they spoke of the exile of RSma 
and the demise of Da 9 aratha, the carnage in JanasthSna, the 
slaying of Jat&yu, the ravishment of Vaidchi, the slaughter of 
Vali, and the ire of Rama, the monkeys were seized with fear. 




M 



RAMAVANA. 



When those monkeys resembling mountain-summits had 
entered in, they set up cries, which, like unto the rumbling of 
clouds, making the sky resound, made that mountain with its 
rills reverberate. 



SECTION LVI. 



W HEN the monkeys had been seated in that mountain, 
with the intention of putting a period to their existence 
through fasting, a king of vultures happened to come to that 
quarter. And that long-lived bird was named Sampftti, the 
beautiful brother of JatSLyu, famous for his strength and 
prowess. Issuing from a cavern of the mighty mountain 
Vindhyn, he, seeing the monkeys seated, well pleased, said — 
“Verily man* reapeth the fruit of his former acts ; and there- 
fore it is that this food ordained to that end, comes to me 
after a long time. I shall feed on these monkeys, one by 
one, slaying them one after another.” Eying those apes, 
the bird expressed himself thus. Hearing this speech of the 
bird coveting his food, Angada faintly spoke to Hanuro&n, 
“Behold! through Sit&’s simplicityt this one — the very son of 
the Sun, Yama — hath come to this place, to exterminate the 
monkeys. Rama’s work hath not been done ; nor the royal 
mandate. And this disaster hath arrived unthought of by 
the monkeys. Ye have in detail heard all that, inspired with 
the desire of doing what is good unto Vaidehi, that king of 
vultures, Jatayu, did here. In this way, all creatures, even 
the brute species, compass the welfare of Rftma, renouncing 
their lives, as we do. It is because of the love and tender* 

* — [~rr ) h mad ij 

the vulture. — T. 

t Another reading is Gridhri padesana — through the vultur's cunning. 
This the commentator considers as'preferrable. — T. 




KISHKINDHlKA N DA Af. 



84 7 



ness* they bear towards (Rama), that people do good unto 
each other. And therefore the righteous Jatayu, of his 
own accord laying down his life, hath done the pleasure of 
R&ma. We also/overcome with fatigue and (almost) dying, 
have come to this forest ; but Mithiia’s daughter we find not. 
Happy is that king of vultures, having been slain by Ravana 
in battle. He hath got quit of the fear of Sugriva, and hath 
also attained supreme state. In consequence of the death of 
Jatftyu and that of king Da^aratha, as well as owing to the 
ravishment of Vaidehi, (the lives of) the monkeys have come 
into jeopardy. Rama's and Lakshmana’s abode in the forest 
with SitJL, Raghava's slaying of Van with a shaft, the slaughter 
of innumerable R&kshasas by the-enraged Rama, and (finally) 
this mishap— all these owe theij orgin to the bestowal of the 
boon on Kaikeyi.” Seeing the monkeys stretched on the 
earth, and hearing their piteous words describing their grief, 
that magnanimous king of vultures, with his mind agitated, 
said (.this). And hearing the words that issued from Angada's 
mouth, the sharp-beaked and high-toned vulture, said,— 
“Who is it that, making my mind tremble, speaketh of the 
death of my brother, Jatayu, dearer unto me than life ? How 
happened in Janasthana the fight between the Rakshasa and 
the vulture ? It is after a long time that to-day I hear the 
name of my brother. I wish to alight from this mountain-fast- 
ness. I have been well pleased by listening after a long 
time to the celebration of the virtues of my younger brother, 
cognizant of qualities and worthy of being extolled by reason 
of bis prowess. Ye foremost of monkeys, I wish to hear of 
the destruction of Jatayu, who dwelt in Janasthana. And 
how could Da^aratha, whose beloved eldest son is Rama, 
dear unto his superiors, be the friend of my brother ? I can 
not move in consequence of my wings having been burnt by 

* The commentator explains in pure orthodox fashion : Because every- 
thing is in Rdma % people serve each other from the love and tenderness , which 
partain to him . — T. 





8 4 8 



rAaiAyana. 



the solar rays. But I wish that ye may take me down frotr* 
this mountain/' 



SECTION lvii. 

0:0 

Hearing his accents faltering through grief, the leaders 
of monkey-herds, alarmed by his action,* did not repose 
confidence in his speech. Seated for the purpose of fasting 
to death, the monkeys, seeing the vulture, with terror thought 
within themselves, — ‘‘He shall eat us all up. If he eat us 
up, who have sat down to fast to death, we shall secure 
success, and speedily attain our end." Then those monkey- 
chiefs resolved thus. And descending from the summit of 
the mountain, Angada spoke unto the vulture, — “There was 
a lord of monkeys named Rhikshar&ja, endowed with 
prowess. That king, O bird, was my grandsire. He had two 
virtuous sons, exceedingly powerful both — V«Ui and Sugriva. 
My father, Vali, was famed in the world for his deeds. And 
it came to pass that mighty monarch of all this earth, 
descendant of the IkstnvSkus, the great and graceful car- 
warrior, Rama, son unto Da£aratha, intent upon the injunction 
of his sire, resorting to the path of righteousness, entered the 
woods of Dandaka in company with his brother, Lakshmana 
and his wife Vaidehi. And his spouse was forcibly carried 
away from Janasthana. And the friend of R&ma's father, the 
king of vultures, named Jatayu, saw Videha's daughter, Siti, 
as she was being carried away in the sky. And after having 
thrown down RSvana from his car, and placed Maithili on the 
ground, That vulture) old and overcome with fatigue was (at 
length) slain by Ravana in battle. Thus slain by the power* 
ful Ravana, the vulture, having had his funereal obsequies 

* Karma na (instru.) by his action. The commentator explains: alarwwd 
by his speech about eating up the monkeys . The passage is obscure.—' T. 




KISHKINBHlKhVDA M. \ 84 * 

performed by R&ma (himself), bath attained excellent state. 
Then Rjghava made friends with my uncle, the high-souled 
Sugriva; and he also slew my sire. My father had debarred 
Sugriva from the kingdom along with his counsellors ; but 
Rlftia, having slain V41i, installed him (Sugriva). And 
established in the monarchy by him (Rama), Sugriva is (now) 
the master of the monkeys and king of all the foremost 
monkeys. By him have we been sent. Despatched hither 
by R&ma, we have searched for Sit& all round, but Vaidehi 
we have not found, as one doth not find the solar splendour 
at night. .And it came to pass that, having heedfully explored 
the Dandaka forest, we through ignorance entered a cave 
tying open before. That cave, thou must know, was constructed 
by the illusive energy of Maya. And there we spent a 
month — the term which had been fixed by the monarch. 
Doing the behests of the king of monkeys, we, having over- 
stayed the term which had been appointed, have from fear 
sat here down for the purpose of fasting unto death. On that 
Klkutstha being wrought up with wrath, as well as Sugriva 
together with Lakshmana, we, repairing thither, shall lose 
our lives .' 1 



SECTION LVlil. 



W HEN the monkeys, whose lives had well nigh departed 
out of them, bad spoken these piteous words, the vulture, in 
solemn accents, with tears in his eyes, said unto the monkeys, 
—“Ye monkeys, ye have said that my younger brother, named 
JatSyu, hath been slain in battle by the powerful R&vana. On 
account of my age and want of wings, I, although hearing 
this, bear it. Nor have I strength to-day to clear scores 
touching my brother's enmity. Formerly, while engaged in 
the destruction of Vritra, lie and I, burning for victory, soared 



107 




850 



JtAAlAVAtfA. 



in the sky near the (laming sun, garlanded by glory. Thence 
impetuously wheeling round, we went to the celestial regions 
along the etherial way. And it came to pass that, coming 
midway of the sun, JatSyu was faint. Witnessing my brother 
severely struck by the solar rays, and exceedingly stupified, 

I from affection shadowed him with my wings. Thereat, my 
pinions scathed, I dropped down on Vindhya, ye foremost of 
monkeys ; and staying here, I could not know the circum- 
stances that have befallen my brother.” Thus addressed by 
JatSyu's brother, SampSti, the eminently wise prince Angada 
answered, — ‘if thou art indeed the brother of Jat&yu, having 
heard what I have related, tell (us) if thou knowest touching 
the abode of that R&kshasa. Tell us if thou knowest anent 
that short-sighted worst of R&kshasas, R&vana, whether 
staying far or near.” Thereat, rejoicing the monkeys, the 
exceedingly energetic elder brother of JalSyu spoke words 
worthy of him, — “Ye monkeys, my pinions have been burnt ; 
and I am a vulture shorn of strength. Therefore I will help 
Rama well by my words. I know the realms of Varuna, and 
Vishnu's Trivikrama* worlds, the wars of the gods and Asuras, 
and the churning for ambrosia. And albeit age hath deprived 
me of energy, and albeit my life hangs loosely on me, yet, if 
this is R&ma's work, it should be done by me first. I have 
seen a youthful and beautiful female, adorned with all orna- 
ments, carried away by the wicked RAvana,~the lady (all 
the while) crying, ‘O RSma V *0 R&ma !' ‘O Lakshmana! 1 And 
taking her ornaments from her person, she was throwing them 
on the ground. Her silken cloth seemed like the solar 
splendour on the summit of a mountain ; and herself beside 
the sable R&kshasa, looked like the lightning in the welkin 
(beside clouds). From your relation of R&ma, I conclude that 
she must be SiUL Now listen to me as I tell you about the 
abode of that R&kshasa. Son unto V^ravana and brother 

* 1. #. the worlds enveloped by his three steps during his Dwarf Incarna- 
tion. — T. 




kishkindhA kAnda m. 



* 5 * 



unto Va^ravana, the Rakshasa named R&vana resides in the 
city of Lankft. And the lovely city of Lanka, reared by 
Vi$wakarm&, lietli a full hundred yoyanas hence on an island 
in the sea ; furnished with golden gateways, filled with varie- 
gated daises, lordly gold-gleaming palaces; and girt round 
with great walls hued like sunshine. There stayeth Vaidehi, 
forlorn and clad in a silken cloth, — confined in the inner 
apartment of R&vana, and carefully guarded by R&kshasis. 
In Lank& protected all round by the sea, ye shall behold 
Janaka’s daughter, Maithili. At the end of the ocean after a 
full hundered yoyanas , arriving at its southern shore, ye shall 
see RSvana. Ye monkeys, do ye hie thither speedily with 
vigor. I perceive by my knowledge that having seen (that 
place), ye shall come back. The first course belongs to fork- 
tailed shrikes and others living on grain ; the second, to 
those that live on animals and fruits ; the third is ranged by 
BhSshas ; the fourth by Kraunchas, Kuvaras and hawks ; the 
fifth by vultures ; the sixth belongs to swans endowed with, 
youth and beauty ; and the next to the Vainateyas. We have 
derived our origin from Vainateya.t (By despatching you 
thither), I shall avenge the heinous deed perpetrated by the 
cannibal, as well as the wrong done by Ravana unto my 
brother. Resting here, I see Rhvana and J&naki. We have 
excellent Sauparna% clairvoyance. For this reason, as well 
as owing to the energy consequent on our feeding on 
certain kinds of flesh, we, ye monkeys, can see a little 
further than an hundred yoyanas. Therefore (the Deity) hath 
ordained such food for us as are fraught with the power of 
making one see from a great distance. And the abode of 
cocks and others being underneath trees, their sight is limited 
to the extent which they- require to see. Do ye look about 

f Arana, son onto Vinati. — T. 

t Clairvoyance attained by success in knowledge respecting the spiritual 
Golden eyes. Thus far the commentator. We leave the abstruse point to the 
apostles of theosophy and spiritism for iilucidation. — T. 




FtiltlAr ANA. 



*5 * 

for means to cross over the salt waters. Haring met with 
Vaidehi, do ye, having achieved success, come bach. I wish 
to be taken by you to the ocean — abode of Varuna. I will 
offer water unto (the manes of) my high-souled brother, 
who hath gone to heaven,” Thereat those heroes, the 
monkeys possessed of exceeding energy, carried to the 
destined spot on the shore of the ocean, Samplti, whose 
wings had been scathed. Then carrying that lord of vul- 
tures back to the self-same place, the monkeys, furnished with 
information (concerning SW, experienced great joy. 



SECTION LIX, 



Then hearing that ambrosial speech of the vulture- king* I 
the monkey-chiefs, being delighted, kept on parleying (on that 
topic). Then JambavSn — foremost of monkeys— together 
with all the monkeys, arising suddenly from the ground, 
spoke unto the vulture-king, saying, — “Where is Sill ? Bjf 
whom hath she been seen ? And who hath carried away 
Mithil&’s daughter? Do thou tell us all about this, and 
(thus) prove the path of these rangers of the woods. Win 
is there that doth not take heed of the force of Dicarathfr? 
and Lakshmana’s arrows, speeding with the vehemence of 
thunder ?” Thereat, cheering up those monkeys, who hi# 
risen from their attitudes of fasting, and who were all atten* 
lion to hear' news concerning Sits, he (Samp&ti), wd 
pleased, said these words, — “Listen as to how I came 10 
know of the ravishment of Vaidehi, Silk, at this place; aai 
who it was that told me where that one of expansive Oftf 
is. For a long time I lay here, old, and of feeble life and 
energy. That best of birds, my son named SnplrfWV 
coming to me, at the proper hour maintained me wi th faoi 
• Lit. Dasaratha's ton. The term is applied in especial to Rlma.— T.' 



KISHKINDHXKl ND A At $55 

Gandharhas are exceedingly lascivious ; serpents are exceed- 
ingly wrathful ; fear is excessive in deer ; and we have 
excessive hunger. Once on a time my son, going forth about 
sunrise to procure food for me who was suffering from 
hunger and (accordingly) eager for it, came back in the 
evening without any flesh. Hurt (by my speech uttered) 
in consequence of my non-receipt of food, that enhancer 
of my joy, asking my forgiveness, said these words fraught 
with fact, — ‘Father, taking to my wings at the proper time 
for procuring flesh, I (went) and stood, obstructing the pass 
of the Mahendra mountain. There stood I looking down, 
obstructing the way of thousands of creatures ranging the sea. 
There I saw somebody resembling a mass of crushed colly- 
rium, going away, taking a female resembling the rising sun 
in splendour. Seeing them, I had made up my mind that 
they should serve for thy fare, when he humbly in a pacific 
manner begged for way. Even among the mean, there is 
none on earth that can slay people who assume a mild 
attitude. What shall I say, alas ! of superior ones like 
myself ? And summoning celerity, he went on as if pushing 
off the sky by his energy. Then the rangers of the air and 
other beings worshipped me. And the Maharshis said unto 
me, — By luck it is that Sit d is still living^ — He together 
with a female , having passed by thee, certainly augurs good 
fortune unto thee.% — Then those eminently handsome Siddhas 
spoke thus unto me. — This is Rdvana , the king of the 
Rdkshasas , said they unto me. And I (stood), beholding the 
wife of R&ma, son unto Da^aratha, — throwing off her orna- 
ments and silken apparel, overwhelmed by might of sorrow, 
with hair dishevelled crying out the names of R&ma and 
Lakshmana. This O father, is the reason of my passing the 

f The commentator supplies the elipsis thus, — "Coming within thy ken by 
luck, Sit& is living.” 

% The passage is obscure. The commentator has glossed over this slake, amt 
the meaning is none the clearer for his explanation.— T. 





*54 



RlMlYANA . 



time/ That best of those skilled in speech, SupSrfwa, said 
all this unto me. Even hearing- of this, I could not think 
of putting forth prowess. How can a bird bereft of wings, 
undertake any thing ? But listen ! I will tell you as to what 
I am capable of through speech, intellect and merit, and 
what ye can exert your manliness in. I will do what is 
agreeable unto you by my words and my intention. That 
which is Da9arathi’s work is also mine. Of this there is no 
doubt. Ye, foremost in intelligence, strong, intellectual, 
and incapable of being overcome by the gods themselves, 
have been despatched by the monarch of monkeys. And 
Rama’s and Lakshmana’s shafts furnished with the feathers 
of the Kanka, are competent to afflict or save the three 
worlds. And although the Ten-necked one is endowed with 
strength and energy, yet to you who are competent, nothing 
is hard to accomplish. There is no need of delay. Make up 
your minds. Persons like you do not give way to laziness 
in enterprise/ 1 



8ECTION LX. 



W HEN the vulture had offered oblations of water unto 
the manes of his deceased brother and finished his ablutions, 
the monkey-chiefs sat down in that charming mountain, 
surrounding him. And inspired with confidence (in the words 
of the N^akara), Sampati, from delight, said unto Angada, 
who was seated, surrounded by all the monkeys, — * 'Remain* 
ing silent, do ye, ye monkeys, heedfully hear what I say. 
I will tell you truly how I came to know Maithili. My body 
being affected by solar heat, and my wings burnt by the 
rays of the sun, O sinless one, I formerly fell to this summit 
of Vindhya. On regaining my senses after six nights, during 
which I was insensible, I looked around in bewilderment, 




XISHKINDHlKlNDA M. 



«55 



but could not recognise anything whatever. Then closely 
Tiewing oceans and mountains, rivers and tanks, and woods 
and countries, my thoughts came back to me. And seeing 
this place abounding in cheerful birds, containing woods and 
Crested with summits, I for certain concluded it to be Vindhya 
pn the shores of the Southern sea. And here lay a sacred 
asylum, honored even by the celestials, and here dwelt a 
saint named Ni^kara, of fierce austerities. And after 
Nifikara cognizant of virtue had gone to heaven, I bereft 
of that saint, passed eight thousand years in this mountain. 
Descending with difficulty from the uneven top of Vindhya, 
I again came* to the earth covered with sharp-pointed grass. 
I was eager to see the saint ; and (therefore), with much ado 
I came to him ; and Jat&yu and myself saw that saint many 
a time and oft. A fragrant breeze blew about the hermitage ; 
and no tree was found that did not bear flowers and fruits. 
Approaching the holy asylum, I, desirous of beholding the 
worshipful Ni^Skara, waited at the foot of a tree. Then at 
a distance I saw the saint, flaming in energy and irrepressi- 
ble, — returning northwards. And as creatures gather round 
a giver, bears and Srimaras , tigers, lions, and various 
reptiles, were going along, surrounding him. And knowing 
that the saint had arrived (at his home), the animals went 
away, as go away forces together with counsellors, when the 
sovereign hath entered (his palace). — The saint was glad on 
seeing me. Then re-entering his asylum for a short space, 
lie came out and enquired for my mission. f O mild one, in 
consequence of thy feathers having undergone alteration, I 
cannot recognise thee. Thy two wings have been blasted 
by fire ; and thy powers in thy frail frame are (in the same 
condition). Aforetime I saw two vultures like unto wind in 
speed,— kings of vultures, brothers, wearing shapes at will. 
Thou art I know, elder, O Samp&ti; and Jatlyu is younger to 
thee. Assuming human forms, you had taken hold of my feet. 



* While the saint was staying h~Te. — T. 





ItlMlFANA. 



856 

Now, what ailment hath attacked thee ? And why have t!iy 
plumes fallen off ? And who hath dealt this punishment unto 
thee ? Do thou tell all this unto me, who am asking theeV' 



SECTION L X I • 



1 hereat Samplti related unto the ascetic all about bis* 
fearful, arduous, and rash act of following up the sun. ‘“O rever - 
end sire, in consequence of my body suffering from sores, I, my 
senses bewildered from shame, and myself fatigued, cannot 
utter words. From pride for power of flight, I and Jat2yu, 
being intoxicated by conceit, began to voyage the sky afar 
off, with the view of testing each other’s prowess, binding 
ourselves by the vow that we would follow the Sun so long 
as he did not enter that mighty Setting mountain, — and 
appear before the ascetics on the summit of Kailiya. And 
simultaneously plunging (into the aerial deep) we saw on the 
earth beneath separate cities resembling car-wheels ; and 
here the sound of musical instruments j and there the tinkl- 
ings of ornaments. And (at places) we beheld many a 
damsel clad in red attire, engaged in singing. And swiftly 
darting up into the sky and approaching the path of the Sun, 
we saw a wood interspersed with swards. And we saw the 
earth covered with crags and masses of rocks, and inter- 
sected by streams resembling threads. And Himavftn, and 
Vindhya, and that mighty mountain, Meru, appeared on the 
earth like elephants in a tank. Then we began to sweat, and 
to be filled with regret ; and fear seized us both. And we 
became bewildered ; and fainted away frightfully.* And we 
knew not the south, or the west, or the quarter presided over 
by Fire ;t and the world that was still burning at the end 

* Consequent on Jattyu having dropped down.— T. 

t South-east. — T. 




KISH KIND HA KAND A M. 



«57 

of a yaga, appeared {unto ns) as if it had been consumed 
quite.* And my mind, combined with my eyes waxed feebler. 
Aod then fixing with might and main my eyes as well as my 
mind (on the sun), I could by a violent exercise of my energy 
behold the sun. And the sun shining, appeared unto us like 
the earth in extent. Then, without asking me Jatlyu dropped 
to the earth. Seeing him, i at once descended from the sky 
aod Jattyu was not burnt in consequence of having been 
shielded by my wings. And scathed through the agitation t 
I fell through the aerial way. I guessed that Jatayu fell in 
Janasthina. And I myself, my wings blasted, and rendered 
inert, fell on Vindhya. Deprived of my kingdom, and my 
brother, and my wings, and my prowess, I wishing to put a 
period to my existence, will hurl myself headlong from this 
summit of the mountain . n 



SECTION L X 1 1 , 



Having said this unto that foremost of ascetics, I smit- 
ten with grief, began to weep. Thereat, after, reflecting for 
a while, that reverend one said, — “Thy wings together with 
two smaller ones shall grow again ; as also thy sight, energy, 
prowess and strength. And having heard of it, and also seen 
it through ascetic power, 1 know that a great deed is going 
to take place. There shall be a king named Da9aratha, 
increaser of the Ikshw£ku race. He shall have a son, named 
Rima, endowed with exceeding energy. And he (R5ma) 
shall repair to the forest in company with his brother, 
Lakshmana ; that one having truth for prowess, having been 
commissioned to that effect by his sire. A friend named 

• The passage is obscure. This is however, all the explanation that the 
commentator has to give. — T. 

t RAmanuya comments : "the confusion seized them as the sun was midway. 
They lost ail sense of direction. The faint succeeded. — T. 

108 




8$3 



RlMlYANA. 



RAvana, the lord of Rakshasas, incapable of being slain by 
either the gods or the D&navas, shall carry off his fRAma's) 
spouse in Janasth&na. And albeit tempted by viands and 
objects of enjoyment and desire, the famous and highly 
virtuous one, plunged in grief, shall not pertake of those 
things. And knowing that Videha’s daughter (hath been fast- 
ing for many a day), Vftsava shall offer Vaidehi pdyaga like 
unto ambrosia, difficult of being procured even by the gods. 
Receiving that food, Maithili, knowing that it hath come from 
Indra ,* took up a little of it from the surface, and dropped it 
to the earth for Rama. Whether my husband as well as his 
younger brother live, or they have attained godhead, let this 
food serve for them/ Raima’s envoys, having been despatch- 
ed thither, t shall come hither. Thou shouldst relate unto 
them all the facts connected with the queen of R&ma. Do 
not by any means go hence ; and in this case, whither, again, 
wilt thou repair ? Do thou stay here for season and place. 
Thou shalt regain thy wings. I could this very day furnish 
thee with wings. But, by staying here in this condition, thou 
wilt be able to compass the welfare of the worlds. Even 
thou shalt do that act in behalf of those sons of the king, of 
the Brahmanas, of the spiritual preceptors, of the ascetics, 
and of Vasava. I also am desirous of beholding the brothers, 
Rama and Lakshmana. I do not wish to hold this life long. 

I would renounce my life/ That Maharshi, conversant with 
the nature of things, told me this/* 

* From the fact of the food not touching the earth, and other signs. It is 
humorous to read the explanation of the commentator as to the reason of India's 
supplying SitA with food. "If SitA remained fasting, RAvana would forego 
his attachment for Vaidehi, on seeing her altered appearance ; and thus his 
destruction could not take place. Further, if he saw SitA retaining her former 
loveliness, he could conclude that Sit A, as also RAiua, were superhuman 
character, and that as such they could not be agents for his destruction accord- 
ing to the prophecy “Ravana shall be slain by a human being/' This inducing 
him to persist in his bellicose attitude towards RAma, would bring down rain 
upon his head.’’ — T. 

t For going to Lanka. — T. 





kishkindhAkInda at. 



859 



SECTION LX Ml. 



Having praised me with these and many other words, 
and bidden me adieu that one skilled in speech, entered his 
own habitation. Issuing out gently from the cave of that 
mountain, I, ascending Vindhya, was expecting you. The 
space covered by the time intervening between then and 
to-day is a little over an hundred years ;* and laying up in 
my heart the speech of that ascetic, l.have been awaiting 
season and place. Settiug out on his great journey, on 
Nit&kara having gone to heaven, I distracted with various 
thoughts, have been consumed by grief.t My rising intention 
of doing away with myself I have suppressed in consideration 
of the words of the ascetic. The reason which he had im- 
parted unto me for preserving my life, hath removed my 
1 pains, even as a flaming fire (dispells darkness). And know- 
| ing the prowess of the impious R&vana, I said in rage to my 
son, versed in speech, — ‘Hearing her lamentation, and know- 
ing themj bereft of Sita, why didst thou not deliver her ?’ 
My son did not do this good office unto Dayaratha, influenced 
by affection for him." As he was speaking thus in the midst 
of the monkeys, his wings sprang up in presence of the 
rangers of the forest. Thereupon, seeing his person furnished 
with grown pinions hued like the infant sun, he experienced 
incomparable raptures, and addressed the monkeys, saying, — 
“By the grace of that Rayarshi of immeasurable energy, my 
wings, which had been burnt up by the rays of the sun, have 
grown again. To-day I have got (back) the strength and 
prowess which I possessed while my youth was yet present. 
Do ye strive every way. Ye shall meet with Sita. And my 
getting (back) my wings inspires (us) with confidence as to 



* The commentator fays “The period is one hundred and eight years.” — T. 
f For the loss of my plumage. — T. 

% Rama and Lakshmana. — T. 




86o t'AIfA. 

success.” Having sard this unto all the monkeys, that ranger 
of the sky and best of birds. Samp&ti, anxious to ascertain 
his power of flight, flew up from the mountain summits. 
Hearing his words, those powerful monkeys, with vigour 
(enhanced,', seeing success before them, felt the height of joy. 
Then those foremost of monkeys, in vigor resembling the 
Wind, getting occasion for displaying their prowess, intent 
upon searching the Janaka’s daughter, set forward towards the 
quarter crested by Abhijit.§ 



SECTION* L x i v\ 



Having heard alT this related to them by the vufturr- 
kins:, the monkeys possessing the strength of lions, (filed with 
delight, bounded and set up a roar. Hearing from Sampiti 
that Ravana was to be slain, the monkeys growing glad r 
came to the ocean, with the desire of seeing SitSr. And 
coming to that country, these ones prossessing dreadful 
prowess, beheld (the sea) reflecting the image of this entire 
mighty world. And arriving at the northern side of the 
Southern sea, those exceedingly powerful heroic monkeys 
took up their quarters there. And seeing the sea, here as if 
asleep, there, as if playful, and at another place with surges 
measuring mountains ; and thronged with the foremost 
DSnavas inhabiting the nether regions ; and capable of causing 
one’s hair to stand on end, those powerful monkeys were 
seized with sadness. And seeing the sea, incapable of being 
crossed even as the sky, all the monkeys began to lament, 
saying, — ‘‘What is to be done ?” And that best of monkeys— 
(Angada), seeing the army cast down because of the sight 

$ Abhijitdbhimukhdn ( arc .) Abhijit — the name of a star. Abhzjit may 
also mean — he who is to be conquered. Then the sense would be, “(ha rtgioo 
in which Ravana was.” — T. 



kisiikindhK kXnda m 



86 1 



oC tlie sea, began to comfort the monkeys, afflicted with 
fear. # ‘\Ve should not indulge in grief. Grief is injurious. — 
Grief destroys a person even as a wrathful serpent doth a 
boy. He that, when the time is come for displaying his 
prowess, indulges in sorrow, growing weak in energy, fails 
to attain his object." That night having passed away, Angada 
in company with the monkeys, joined by the old ones, again 
took counsel with them. And that monkey-host surrounding 
Angada, resembled the host of Maruts environing Vasava. 
Who save Vali’s son (stationed) at one place and at another 
Hanum&n, could be capable of stilling that force ? Then salut- 
ing the elders as well as the army, the graceful Angada— 
repressor of foes — spoke words fraught with sense, — “What 
person, endued with exceeding energy, shall now leap over the 
main ? Who 9hall serve that subduer of enemies, Sugriva, ever 
intent on truth ? What monkey can leap over an hundred 
yoyanas ? Who shall deliver leaders of herds from a mighty 
fear ? By whose favor shall we, crowned with success and 
rendered happy, returning from this place, shall behold our 
wives and our sons, and our homes ? By whose favor shall 
we joyfully meet R3ma, and the mighty Lakshmana, and that 
dweller in the woods, Sugriva ? If any monkey among you is 
competent to bound over the deep, let him at once confer on 
us Dakshin& in the shape of deliverance from fear." Hearing 
Angada’s speech, none said anything. And that host of 
monkeys wavered. Then that foremost of monkeys again 
addressed those monkeys, saying, — All of you are the fore- 
most of strong ones, and of steady prowess. And ye have 
sprung in blameless lines, and are ever honored (by the king). 
And yet no one of you can promise to undertake this 
journey ? Ye best of monkeys, unfold your respective powers 
in bounding." 




862 



r\m\vana. 



SECTION LX V. 



Hearing Angada’s speech, those foremost monkeys 
one after another began to speak, touching their respective 
competence in coursing — Gaya, and Gav&ksha, and Gavayn, 
and Sarabha, and Gandhamadana, and Mainda, and Dwivida, 
and Angada, and Jambavftn. And Gaya said. — n I can leap 
over ten yoyanas ,” And Gavftksha said, — “I shall go twenty 
yoyanas ” And the monkey Sarabha said to those 
monkeys, — “Ye monkeys, I shall go thirty yoyanas.” And 
the monkey, Rhishava, said to those monkeys, — “ I shall, 
without doubt, go forty yoyanas And the exceedingly 
energetic monkey, Gandhamadana. said, —“I shall, for certain 
go fifty yoyanas'' And the monkey Mainda said unto the 
monkeys there, — “ I shall undertake to leap over sixty yoya- 
nas.'’ And then the highly energetic Dwivida said, — “I shall, 
for certain, go seventy yoyanas. And the highly powerful 
Sushena, possessed of strength — foremost of monkeys said — 
“I declare that in motion I am equal to eighty yoyanas!' As 
they were speaking thus, the oldest of them all, Jambavftn, 
saluting them, answered — “Formerly we had power of motion. 
But now we have waxed exceeding old. Although this is so, 
yet we can not overlook this, as both Rftma and the monkey- 
king (by sending us) have become sure of success. At present 
do thou understand the course that is ours. I shall go ninety 
yoyanas. There is no doubt whatever about this.” Jambavftn 
said this unto those choice monkeys. But (formerly) my 
prowess in leaping was forsooth not such* Of old 
in the sacrifice of Virochana's son, the eternal Lord Vishnu, 
when he had covered the entire universe with three steps, 
was circumambulated by me. But I who was all this, have 
waxed old, and my vigor sits feebly upon me. In my youth, 



• i. e. it was greater. — T. 




KISHRINDHlKk NDA At. 



863 



liowever, my strength was exceeding great and incomparable. 
Now I can only by my own energy, course thus far. But 
such a bound shall not bring success on our undertaking. 
After this, saluting the mighty monkey, Jambavan, the wise 
Angada spoke straight sense, saying, — “I can go over this 
mighty hundred yoyanas ; but there is no certainty as to my 
power of returning.” Thereat, Jambavan, cognizant of speech, 
said unto that foremost of monkeys, — “O foremost of leonine 
ones, we know thy power of motion, thou art capable of 
coursing a hundred thousand yoyanas, as well as of coming 
back. But we say that even this is what is fit. My child, 
the master must on no account be commanded by his servants. 
0 foremost of monkeys, all these should be commanded 
by thee. Thou art our spouse, and (at the same time) occu- 
pying the position of our husband. The master is the spouse 
of the army. This is the way of the world, O repressor of 
foes ! O subduer of enemies, thou art the root of this busi- 
ness. Therefore, my child, thou shouldest always be 
maintained by us like a wife. The root of any work must 
be preserved. This is the policy of those versed in business. 
The root existing, all the virtues, obtaining fruit, certainly 
meet with suceess. Thou, O thou having truth for prowess 
art the instrument of this undertaking, and, O subduer of 
enemies, furnished with sense and vigor, thou art the occasion 
herein. And, O foremost of monkeys, thou art both our 
superior, and our superior's son ; and resorting to thee we 
are enabled to accomplish our object.” Thereat that mighty 
monkey, Angada, son unto VSli, answered the exceedingly 
wise Jambavan, when he had spoken, — “If I go not, nor any 
other powerful monkey, then we should for certain again sit 
ourselves down to fast unto death. Without doing the man- 
date of the intelligent lord of monkeys, we, repairing thither, 
shall not behold ourselves alive. He is extreme both in 
showing favor and in anger. Disregarding his order, we shall, 
going there, meet with destruction And his ire shall, not 




86 * 



rAmAvana. 



take any other course. Therefore it behoves thee, capable 
of seeing issues, to reflect.” Thus addressed by Angada 
that powerful and heroic monkey JambavSn answered Angada 
in excellent words, saying, — “That business, O hero, shall 
not moult a feather. I shall despatch even him who shall 
bring about success.” — Then that heroic monkey ordered the 
foremost of monkeys, the highly heroic monkey Ilanuroin, 
who stood apart, convinced (of the wisdom of Jambavin’s 
decision.) 



SECTION L X V I . 



(SURVEYING the monkey-host consisting of many hundreds 
and thousands, — crest-fallen, Jambav&n thus spake unto 
Hanumin, — “O hero among the monkey-multitude, 0 best 
of those versed in all branches of learning, staying apart in 
silent, why dost thou not speak ? O Hanum&n, thou art alike 
in energy and strength, equal to Sugriva, monarch of 
monkeys, and to R&ma and Lakshmana. Arishtanemi's son, 
the mighty Vainateya* famous by the cognomen of Garutroin, 
is the foremost of birds. Many a time and oft I have see® 
that exceedingly powerful, mighty-armed one, endowed with 
strength of will, — raise up serpents in the ocean. The 
strength that is in his wings is equal to the might and virtue of 
thy arm. Thy energy and prowess are not surpassed by him* 
And thy strength, and thy understanding, thy energy, and 
thy vigour, O foremost of monkeys, (is known among 
creatures). Why dost not thou prepare thyself furnished with 
everything that is noble or great, (for this feat)? That fore- 
most of Apsaras, — the famous PunjikathalA, more famed under 
the name of AnjanS, is the spouse of the monkey Kesarin- 



* Offspring uf YinatA, Garura’s mother.— T. 





KISH KIND HA KIND A M. 



H65 

Famed over the three worlds, and incomparable on earth^by 
virtue of her beauty, by an imprecation, my son, she was 
born in the monkey-race, capable of wearing shapes at her 
will. Once on a time, that daughter of the high-souled lord 
of monkeys, Kunjara, — endeued with youth and beauty, — 
decked in a delightful garland, and clad in silk, — assum* 
ing a human form, was ranging on the summit of a mountain, 
resembling a mass of clouds in the rainy season. And it came 
to pass that as that one of expansive eyes was standing on the 
summit of the mount, the Wind gently stole away her elegant 
yellow cloth with crimson skirts. And he had a sight of her 
fair and fine face, together with her well-developed breasts. 
And soon as the Wind saw that illustrious one of spacious 
hips and slender waist, and whose every limb was lovely, — 
he was amain overcome by desire. And all his frame 
possessed by Manmatha , and deprived of self, the Wind em- 
braced that blameless one by means of his long arms. There- 
at, influenced by fear, that one of excellent vows said, — 
‘Who is it that desireth to lay violent hands upon my 
chastity f Hearing Anjan&’s words, the Wind answered, — 
‘I do not wrong thee, O thou of shapely hips. Let not 
fear enter thy heart. As, O famous damsel, by embracing 
thee, I have mentally entered into thy womb, thou shalt 
bear a son, intelligent and endeued with prowess. And, 
gifted with great strength, and possessing exceeding energy, 
and having vast vigor, he shall equal me in bound- 
ing and leaping/ Thus addressed, O mighty monkey, thy 
mother, O long-armed one, O foremost of monkeys, gave 
birth to thee in a cave. And in that mighty forest, thou, a 
child, desirous of eating, seeing the Sun risen, and taking 
him to be a fruit, sprang up and leaped into the sky. And, O 
mighty monkey, going three thousand yoyanas , thou, struck by 
his energy, didst not feel poverty of spirit. And, seeing thee 
rushing through the heavens, O mighty monkey, Indra, 
growing wroth, hurled his thunder-bolt at thee. Thereat, 

109 




C66 



rAmAyana. 



breaking thy left jaw, thou (didst fall) on the mountain-top. 
From this circumstance, thy name hath been known as 
II an uma nr Witnessing thee beaten back, that bearer of per- 
fumes himself, the Wind, that breaketh everything before him. 
in wrath did not blow through the three worlds. Thereat, all the 
gods — lords of the universe — influenced by fear in conse- 
quence of the triune world waxing agitated, began to pacify 
the wrathful Wind. And on the Wind being mollified,Brahroi 
conferred on him a boon, saying,— ‘O child, O thou of true 
prowess, (thy son) shall be incapable of being slain in battle 
by means of weapons.* And seeing liimt sustain no 
(serious) injury consequent on the impact of the thunder-bolt, 
He of a thousand eyes, pleased in his soul, also conferred 
on (thee) an excellent boon, O lord, saying, — 'Thy death shall 
take place according to thy will.* Thou, endowed with dread- 
lul vigor, art the son of Kesari by his wife ; and, resembling 
the Wind in energy, thou hast sprung from his loins. Tbou 
art the son of the Wind, my child — equal to him in the 
power of leaping. Now we are without our lives. And now 
thou, endowed with dexterity and vigor, and like another king 
of the monkeys, i art before us. On the occasion of Vishnu's 
enveloping the earth with three steps, I, O child, had circum- 
ambulated the earth with her mountains, woods and forests, 
one and twenty times. Then, commissioned by the gods, we 
had gathered annuals, which being cast on the deep), caused 
ambrosia to come out after churning. At that time, great 
was our strength. But now 1 have grown old, and my 
prowess hath left me. At present we have thee, furnished 
with every virtue. Therefore, possessed of vigor, do thou 
bestir thyself, and bound over (the main). Thou art the most 
qualified of all. Tli is entire monkey Jiost is eager to behold 
thy prowess. () redoubtable monkey, do thou arise! Do 

' ILx'.iu — in caii 5 /./:•. ll.:nuind:i nu-ans — //*- the it red) jaw. — T. 

v Hanurn'in. — T. 

: -T. 




KISHKINDHl K\N DA M. 



867 ' 

thou leap over the mighty ocean. Thy motion, Hanum§n, 
surpasscth that of all beings. All the monkeys are depressed. 
Why, O Hanuman, dost thou overlook this ? Put forth thy 
vigor, O thou endowed with mighty vehemence, like Vishnu 
crossing over the three worlds in three steps.” Exhorted by 
the foremost of monkeys, that one famed for his speech, that 
monkey, the offspring of the Wind-god, gladdening the monkey- 
hosts, wore (a fit) shape for crossing the ocean.* 



S ECTI ON l x v 1 1 . 



Seeing that foremost of monkeys enlarge his person for 
crossing over an hundred yojanas, and suddenly filled with 
energy, (the monkeys) at once renounced sorrow, and, filled with 
delight, set up ululations and fell to eulogizing the mighty 
Hanuman. And, struck with amazement, they, (staying) all round, 
joyfully gazed (at him) ; even as creatures beheld N&rayana, 
when stretching forth his three steps, he prepared him- 
self (for the succeeding feat). And, eulogized by them, the 
wondrous mighty Hanuman increased; and, floutishing his tail 
from joy, attained strength. And as, extolled by the principal 
elderly monkeys, he became fraught with effulgence, his beauty 
was great. As a lion fills himself with vigor in an open 
cave, so the son of the Wind-god filled himself with energy. 
And the face of him, as that intelligent one was filling'himself 
with force, was aflame like a frying-pan, or like unto 
fumeless fire. Rising in the midst of the monkeys, HanumSn 
with his down standing on end through joy, saluting the 
aged monkeys, said, — “Wind, the friend of Fire, shattereth 
mountain-summits ; and, [ever blowing in the eye of the 



* Here is another epithet of Hanuman — Pavandtmaja — son unto the Wind- 
god. Left out on the score of rcdundcncy. — T. 




868 



rAmAtana. 



sky, he is possessed of strength, and is of immeasurable 
(might), Begot from his loins, I am the son of the 
fast-coursing and high-souled Wind, coursing swiftly. 1 
am his equal in all these accomplishments*. I can, 
without once stopping, circumambulate the extensive and 
heaven-cleaving mountain, Meru, for a thousand times. 
And, dashing the ocean with my arms, I can deluge 
the world with its mountains, rivers and lakes. Lashed 
by the force of my legs and thighs, that abode of Vanina, 
the sen, out which have sprung the ferocious aquatic 
animals, overleaps its continents. And for once that lord of 
birds, Vinala's offspring, living on serpents, courseth through 
the welkin, I can course through it a thousand times. And I 
can touch the flaming effulgent Sun ere, beginning his journey 
from the Rising hill, he ascends the Setting hill. And, ye 
foremost of monkeys, I can, fiercely rushing on, come again 
without touching the earth. And I can bound beyond stars 
and planets, suck up the oceans, and rive the earth. And 
a monkey, I can, leaping, crush mountains ; and, leaping, 1 
can drain the mighty ocean dry. And, when I shall leap in 
the sky, flowers from various shrubs and trees shall follow 
me to-day. And then my course, flecked with flowers), shall 
resemble even the sky (studded with stars). And, ye 
monkeys, then all creatures shall see me,now ranging through 
the profound firmament, now shooting up, and now descend- 
ing ion the other shore). Resembling Mah&meru, me ye 
shall behold, yc monkeys, making my way, covering up the 
sky, as if devouring up the heavens. I shall, leaping and 
con centrating my energy, scatter the clouds, shake the hills, 
"amTsuck up the ocean. The strength of Yinat&'s son, or 
the Wind-god’s, or mine, (surpasses that of every other 
creature). None save the sovereign of birds, or the exceedingly 
mighty Wind, can follow me in flight. In the twinkling of 
an eye I shall spread through the unsupported sky, like 



* i. i\ pcrt'iining to lcriping. — T. 




KISHRINDHIkJlNDA M. 



869 



lightning darting from clouds. And at the time of leaping 
over the ocean, my form shall resemble that of the energizing 
Vishnu, when He had assumed the triune energy. I perceive 
through my intelligence, (and my mental motion tallies), that 
I shall behold Vaidehi. Therefore, ye monkeys, rejoice. In 
vehemence like unto Garura, I shall, I conceive, go an 
Ayuta yojattas. I can, suddenly summoning energy, bring 
hither ambrosia from the very grasp of Vasava or BrahmS, 
himself.* I shall leap sheer over Lanka. Even this is my 
impression .’ 1 Filled with delight, the monkeys there amazed 
see that foremost of monkeys, endued with immeasurable 
might, storming. And, hearing his speech capable of removing 
the grief of kindred, that best of monkeys Jambavan, 
transported with joy, said, — “O hero ! O son of Kesari ! O 
offspring of the Wind ! the huge sorrow of thy kindred hath, 
my child, been destroyed by thee. And these foremost of 
monkeys assembled, who wish for thy welfare, shall, with 
intent minds, perform acts tending to thy weal, — so that thou 
mayst succeed in thy undertaking. And by the grace of the 
saints, and with the permission of the aged monkeys, and by 
the blessing of the superiors, do thou bound over the mighty 
main. Till thou return, we shall stay on one leg.f The 
lives of all these rangers of the forest shall go along with 
thee.” Then that tiger-like monkey said unto those rangers 
of the woods, — “None in this world would be able to sustain 
my impetus in the act of bounding. Here are these summits, 
firm and spacious, of this mountain, Mahendra, thronged with 
crags. I shall rush forward from these summits of Mahendra, 
interspersed with trees and adorned with masses of ore. 
And as I leap over a hundred yojanas, these mighty summits 
shall sustain my impetus.” Then he equalling the Wind, that 
monkey, the son of the Wind-god, pounder of enemies, 

* Vdsava, Iodra, carries celestial ambrosia, and Brahmd, that which is the 
aliment in Yoga — or spiritual rapture. — T. 

t i. e. practise austerities on thy behalf. — T. 



870 



KAmA}'ANA. 



ascended that best of mountains, Mahendra ; covered with 
various trees and flowers, furnished with swards ; ranged by 
deer ; containing plants and blossoms with trees bearing 
fruits and flowers daily ; having tigers and lions and 
infuriated elephants ; swarming with maddened birds ; 
and abounding with fountains. Ascending (Mahendra), that 
foremost of monkeys endeued with exceeding strength, and 
resembling Mahendra himself in prowess, began to range from 
one mighty summit to another. Thereat, hurt by the arms of 
that high-souled one, that mighty mountain began to cry,* 
like a mighty mad elephant tormented by a lion. And water 
rushed out of masses of rocks scattered around. And that 
mighty mountain had its deer and elephants afflicted with 
afright; and its giant trees shaken: and its spacious up- 
lands deserted by various Gandharva couples engaged in 
drinking and dalliance, and by birds flying away, and by 
bevies of Vidyadharas ; and its huge serpents distressed, and 
its cliffs and peaks toppling down. And with its serpents 
hissing, with their bodies half issuing from their holes), the 
mountain seemed as if it shone with pennons displayed. And 
the heap of crags forsaken by saints exercised with fear 
and agitation, looked doleful, like a wayfarer left in a vast 
forest by bis companions. And that intelligent, magnanimous 
and heroic monkey — destroyer of hostile heroes, — endowed 
with speed, concentrating his soul on his energy, mentally 
went to Lanka. 

* Through the ?•».#;» <f the m: hauls if. — T. 

i.N I* ’ I S 1 1 i . I X ! ) * I A X A N n A . 




VOL. V. 



PARTS XV! -XX 



THE 

5 RAMAYANA. 

K\ 



TlUN$L\7Fr> INTO ENGLISH PRCfE FROM 1 HE C1U(.‘\A1 

Sanskrit of Valmiki. 

SUXDAR-A. kandaji. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 

MANM ATHA NATH DUTT, M. A. 

Rector , Keshub Academy . 



FRINTED BY 

Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 

Deva Press, 65 2 , Bfadon Street 

CALCUTTA. 



1892. 



[Alt nghts reserved. 1 



‘NO 5 n*j 7 

is V , 



FOR THE COMPLETE SZ~ IN ADVANCE 
I\ IvniA Re 




«74 



rXmXyana . 



heart upon his journey. Then having, with his face to the East, 

joined his palms to his Sire, that blessed one began to attain 
proportions for journeying towards the South. And sure 
as the sea increases on the occasion of a Parva % (Hanumln) 
determined on his leap, experiencing exhilaration, began, in 
the midst of the foremost monkeys, to increase for the behoof 
of R£ma. Attaining measureless magnitude, he desirous of 
crossing over the ocean, pressed the mountain with bis arms 
and legs. And roughly handled by the monkey, the mountain 
anon shook for a while ; and all the blossoms showered down 
from the tops of the trees. And covered all over with heaps 
of fragrant flowers thrown* off from the trees, the entire 
mountain wore one floral look. And afflicted by that one of 
first-rate prowess, that mountain shed water, like an elephant 
in rut. And hard beset by that powerful one, the mountain 
Mahendra put out the golden, silvern and collyrium sheen 
(that appertained thereto). And the mountain began 
to cast forth huge crags containing red arsenic; and its 
middle resembled smoke embosoming a sparkling flame. 
And sore tormented by the monkey engaged in harassing 
them, all the creatures dwelling in the caverns cried in 
frightful tones. And that mighty chorus* of the creatures 
consequent on the mountain's agony filled the entire 
earth, all the cardinal points, and the groves. And snakes 
bringing out their spacious hoods marked with blue streaks, 
vomitting fierce fire, began to bite at the rocks with their 
fangs. And those gigantic crags, bit at by those enraged 
(snakes) of virulent venom, flamed up with fire and were 
shivered unto a thousand fragments. And those medicinal 
herbs that grew there, albeit endowed with the virtue of 
neutralizing poison, could not tame the fierceness of the 

interpret the epithet as meaning R&ma. This is reading into the author m 
sense which the passage does not plainly yeild. — T. 

* Another reading is : sa mahd salwasanruida — The dans ef tkm weighty 
creatures.— T 




SUNDARA KIND AM, 



875 



venom of those serpents. Then, conceiving that the mountain 
was being riven by Brahma RAkshasas, the ascetics, becom- . 
ing agitated, as well as the Vidyidharas together with their 
females, began to flee away. And forsaking their golden 
•eats and cans on the drinking grounds, and costly vessels, 
and water-pots plated with gold, and diverse suckable viands 
and meats of various kinds, and bucklers of bull hides, gold- 
hafted swords, — beings with wreathes on their necks, inebriate, 
bearing red garlands and unguents, having red eyes resembl- 
ing lotuses, flew into the firmament. And fair ones decked 
in chains and bangles and Keyuras and bracelets,* struck 
with amaze, with a smile rose in the sky along with their 
pafamours. And witnessing this mighty phenomenon, 
Vidy&dharas and Maharshis, mounted into the sky, gazing at 
the mountain. And they heard the words of spirit-pervaded 
ascetics, and Ch£ranas, and Siddhas, stationed in the azure 
•ky : “This mountain-like Hanumin, son of the Wind, en- 
deued with exceeding vehemence, is anxious to cross over 
the main— abode of Varuna. And undertaking an arduous 
task in the interests of RAma and monkeys, this one wishes 
to go to the other shore of the sea hard to reach/ 1 
Hearing this speech of the ascetics, the Vidy&dharas saw 
in the mountain that foremost of monkeys of immeasur- 
able might. And that one resembling fire shook and bristled 
his down ; and he set up a tremendous roar resembling a 
mighty (rumbling) cloud. And springing up, he lashed his 
tail furnished all over with hair and folds, like the king of 
birds handling a serpent. And the tail of that one endued 
with exceeding impetus, bent and brandished, seemed like 
a gigantic serpent carried off by Garura. And the monkey 
planted his arms resembling mighty clubs, fast (on the mount- 
ain); and his waist became slender; and his legs were 



* Parikdra , according to Kataka, implies excellence, Tirtha says it means 
iraeeieis, I follow him. — T. 





RlMA FAN A. 



876 

contracted. And contracting his arms* and neck, that 
graceful and powerful one summoned energy, and strength, 
physical and mental. And looking at his way from a distance, 
Hanuman, raising his eyes up, and fixing his gaze at the 
sky, suspended his breath in his breast. And planting his 
feet firmly, that one endowed with mighty strength, Han um&n, 
foremost of monkeys, contracting his ears up, sprang forward; 
and that best of monkeys spoke unto the monkeys, sayings — 
“As a shaft shot by Raghava, courses like the wind, so will 
I course to Lanka ruled by Ravana. And if I fail to find 
Janaka’s daughter in Lank§, 1 shall with the self-same speed 
repair to the regions of the celestials. And if I do not find 
Sita in Lanka, after taking so much trouble, I shall bring 
the Rakshasa king bound. Either attaining complete success, 
I shall come hither (back) ; or uprooting Lanka with Ravana 
in it, I shall carry it hither.” Having observed this, the 
monkey HanumSn, foremost of monkeys, endowed with 
speed, without pausing for thought, suddenly sprang up. 
And that powerful monkey deemed himself like unto Suparna. 
And as he flew up, the trees situated in that mountain, in 
consequence of his violent rush, shrinking their boughs, rolled 
over on all sides. And drawing up blossoming trees filled 
with maddened lapwings, by the vehemence of his flight, 
he coursed on in the clear sky. And those trees borne up 
by the vehemence of his flight, followed the monkey for 
a while, like friends following a friend that hath set out for 
a far country. And pulled up by the impetus of his (rushing) 
thighs, Salas and other mighty trees followed Hanumftn, 
as an army follows its monarch. And surrounded by innumer* 
able trees having their tops crested with flowers, Hanumin 
wearing a mountain-like appearance, was wonderful to 
behold. And those trees that were more ponderous, plunged 
into the salt sea, as plunged the mountains into Varuna’s 



Above his shoulders. — T. 



SUNDARA KIND AM. 



877 



ode, afflicted with the fear of Mahendra.* And strewn 
th various sprouts and buds and blossoms, the monkey 
sembling a mass of clouds, looked lovely like a hill filled 
ith glow-worms. And uprooted by the force of his rush, 
ose trees, their flowers fallen off, plunged into the sea, 
ce friends returning to their homes (after having accompa- 
;ed their friend some way). And blown by the wind caused 
f the monkey, the various variegated flowers of the trees 
i consequence of their lightness, showered down on 
lie sea. And covered with heaps of fragrant flowers of 
iverse hues, the monkey resembled a mass of clouds 
mbellished by lines of lightning. And the waters (of 
lie ocean) strewn with blossoms carried off by his motion, 
ppeared like the sky garnished with charming stars (cresting 
be same). And his arms stretched in the sky, seemed like 
ve-hooded snakes issuing from a mountain. And he ap- 
eared as if he was drinking up the mighty deep with its 
tultitudes of waves, or as if that redoubtable monkey was 
esirous of sucking up the sky itself. And as he coursed 
le orbit of air, his eyes flashing like lightning, resembled 
No craterst aglow on a mountain. And the eyes of that 
>remost of tawny-hued ones resembled the sun and the moon 
tationed in a vast yellow aureola. And beside his coppery 
ose, his face looked coppery, as looks the solar disc on the 
pproach of eve. And the uplifted tail of the Wind-god's 
ffspring engaged in bounding, appeared beautiful in the 
:y like the raised standard of Sakra. And the exceedingly 
ise son of the Wind, Hanum&n, having white teeth, with 

* The legend is that Indra or Mahendra — i. e. Indra the Great — once took 
into his head to clip the pinnions of all the mountains. Hence the 
fht— T. 

t Parvataslhdvivh nalam — like two fires on a mountain. It evidently means 
> active craters in a mountain. At least this rendering, without missing 
: sense, imparts a material sublimity to the passage rarely paralleled in 
srature. The commentator, however, takes the word to mean forest-con- 
^ration. — T. 





8;8 



hXmXvana. 



his tail coiled up, looked handsome like the sun with hit 
disc. And on account of his waist being deeply coppery, 
that mighty monkey appeared like a mountain running a 
mighty torrent mixed with minerals and red chalk. And 
the wind that had got into the armpits of that leonine monkey 
who was crossing over the main, roareth like clouds. And 
as a meteor consisting of many smaller ones, darting from 
above falleth down (to the earth), rushed on that foremost 
of monkeys. And then that stalwart monkey resembling 
the careering sun, resembled a mad elephant fettered by 
the middle, whose bulk has increased immensely. And 
as he coursed above, on account of the reflection cast by 
his body (on the bosom of the deep), the monkey* looked 
like a bark swayed by the breeze. And wherever that mighty 
monkey went about the sea, the state of things appeared to 
undergo a violent convulsion owing to impetus imparted by 
his body. And that mighty monkey possessed of exceeding 
speed, rushed on, raising multitudes of surges on the sea 
by his breast resembling rock. And the wind begot of the 
monkey as well as that of the clouds, issuing out, made the 
dread-sounding ocean roll violently. And pushing ip 
multitudes of high-heaving billows from the salt waters, that 
tiger-like monkey rushed on, separating earth and heaven. 
And that one endeued with vehement speed passed over 
surges in the mighty main resembling Mandara or Meru; ai 
if counting themf. And the waters lashed up to the clooil i 
by the force (of his speed), looked like autumnal cloodi 
overspreading the sky. And then whales and alligators ani 
fishes and tortoises appeared plainly visible, like the peisosi 
of individuals, when the cloth hath been taken off them. All 
sea-serpents, seeing that tiger-like monkey proceeding ii 
the sky, took him for Suparna himself. And the shadow of tin 
leonine monkey, measuring ten yojanas in width and thiil^ 

• Under water. — T. 

t by his progress.— T. 



I 



SUNDA R AKAN DAM. 



879 



length, seemed the more handsome in consequence of his 
eed. And that shadow resembling masses of white clouds, 
ling on the salt waters and following the wind-god’s son, 
smed exceedingly beautiful. And that exceedingly energetic 
ghty monkey possessed of a gigantic body, appeared 
lendid in the unsupported aerial way, like a winged mount- 
i. And the deep beside the course that was being 
bemently pursued by that elephantine monkey, was suddenly 
med into a water-course.* And coursing through the regions 
fowls like the monarch of the feathered race, Hanuman, 
shing away masses of clouds, resembled the wind himself, 
id collossal clouds scattered by the monkey, pale and crim- 
a and blue and mangistha- hued, looked exceedingly lovely, 
id now entering into the clouds, and now emerging from 
sm, he looked like the moon, sometimes hid and sometimes 
ilble. And beholding that monkey engaged in bounding 
th celerity, gods, Gandharbas and Danavas began to strew 
issoms (on him). And as he was leaping, the Sun did not burn 
n j and the Wind ministered unto him, for the success of 
Una's work. And the saints hymned his praises, as he was 
ping on in the sky. And applauding the ranger of forests, 
jy raised the voice of song. And nagas and Yakshas, and 
rious (races of) Rakshasas, eulogized (him), on beholding 
it tiger-like monkey, Hanuman, in the act of bounding. 
id Hanum&n, that lord of monkeys, being engaged in the 
t of bounding, the Ocean, wishing glory unto the race of 
* Ikshwlkus, thought within himself, “Truly shall I be 
lined of all persons if 1 do not assist this lord of monkeys— 
inum&n. Reared 1 have been by Sagara, the foremost of the 
:e of the Ikshwakus — and this monkey is their counsellor, 
therefore doth not behove me to tire him out. It becometh 
s to do that by which the monkey may take rest in me and, 
ieved, may happily traverse the remaining way.” Having 



The sense is hard to hit. The commentator says f that agitated by Hanum&n’s 
ed, the clouds began to pour down showers on the ocean.— T. . ... - 





88o 



rAaiIvaNa. 



arrived at this wholesome resolution, the Ocean spake unto 
that best of mountains, Mainaka, hued in gold and situate is 
the waters, saying, “O lord, thou hast been placed here by the 
king of celestials as an outer gate against the Asuras inhabit- 
ing the region under the earth. Thou too, from then, bait 
been waiting at this gate, unapproachable by the Asum, 
rising up again and again and whose prowess is well-known 
(unto the Lord of celestials). O mountain, thou art capable 
of expanding thyself upwards, downwards and on thy sides 
I do command thee therefore, O best of mountains, to rise up. 
That best of monkeys, the energetic Hanum&n, the performer 
of mighty deeds, engaged in Rama’s service, worn out with 
fatigue, waiteth above thee. Beholding the exhaustion of 
that leader of monkeys, it behoveth thee to rise up.” Hearing 
the speech of the Ocean, the golden mountain Mainhka, 
covered with tall trees and creepers, rose up instantly from 
his watery bed. Like unto the Sun of bright rays rising out 
of the watery expanse, he uplifted himself from the Ocean. 
Being thus commanded by the Ocean, the great mountain, 
covered on all sides with water, immediately brought forth 
his peaks. The sky was as if cleft by these golden summits 
like unto the rising of the Sun, inhabited by Kinnaras and 
large Serpents. The golden summits of that mountain being 
thus lifted up, the dark-blue sky assumed the golden hue. 
And by those highly resplendent golden peaks that best of 
mountains assumed the brilliance of a thousand suns. Beholding I 
before him that up-heaved mountain in the midst of the salt 
Ocean, Hanum&n regarded it, as a barrier for ayr« Like unto 
Wind dispersing clouds, that mighty monkey with great velo- 
city crushed down those up-lifted peaks with his breast Being i 
thus crushed down by that monkey, the best of mounUutfb Si 
being apprized of his prowess, began to shout with joy. m 
Thereupon, with a glad heart assuming the semblance of * I* 
man and stationing himself upon his own summit, ttat li 
mountain-chief addressed Hanum&n, saying, “O best of 1 i 



SUN DA RA KIND A AL 



88 « 



monkeys, forsooth hast thou been engaged in this arduous 
task. Coming down on my peak do thou take rest. This 
ocean was reared by one born in the family of Raghus. And 
beholding thee engaged on Rama's behoof he is worshipping 
thee. The best and everlasting virtue consists in returning 
benefits unto one who hath benefitted us. Benton returning 
benefits unto Raghu's race, he deserveth respect from thee. 
And to welcome thee properly 1 have been despatched by 
him with the message — ‘Traversing over a hundred yoyanas 
this monkey hath been worn out with fatigue ; let him voyage 
to the remaining way after resting for a while on thy summit. 
Do thou therefore, O best of monkeys, remain here and take 
rest. And feasting on these many fragrant and sweet fruits 
and roots, O foremost of monkeys, do thou relieve thyself 
of the toil and proceed. O leader of monkeys, my relation 
with thee is replete with many virtues and known all over 
the three worlds. O Son of Maruta, O best of monkeys, I 
know thee to be the foremost of all monkeys. Even an ordi- 
nary guest should be adored by him who abideth by virtue, 
what of thee great as thou art ? O thou lion among monkeys, 
thou art the son of Maruta, the foremost of celestials and 
art his equal in speed. Thou that art conversant with virtue, 
being worshipped, Maruta himself receiveth offerings. Thou 
art therefore worthy of my adoration. Hearken, there is 
another reason for it. O worshipful one, in olden times, 
the mountains, gifted with wings, began to range all quarters 
with velocity like unto Garuda. They moving thus, the celes- 
tials, the asceties, and all creatures became almost faint with 
fear of their falling down. Highly enraged therefore, the 
thousand-eyed Deity, the performer of hundred sacrifices, 
sundered with his thunderbolt, the wings of hundreds and 
thousands of them. When with his thunderbolt, the Lord 
of celestials, wroth, approached me, I was all on a sudden 
thrown down by the high-souled Wind. O best of monkeys 
I was thus cast down in this salt ocean and preserved unhurt 



in 




RAmAYAiVA. 



?’S2 

by thy ancestors having my wings hid. I shall therefore 
adore thee and thou art object of my worship O Mlruta! 
And this my relation with thee f O foremost of monkeys, is 
pregnant with many virtues. The time for returning benefits 
having arrived, O high-souled one, it behoveth thee to afford 
me and the ocean, satisfaction with a blessed heart. O best 
of monkeys, relieve thyself of the fatigue and accept my 
affectionate offerings, who am worthy of thy respect* 
Happy am I to see thee.” Being thus accosted by Mainlka,the 
best of mountains, HanumSln, the foremost of monkeys said, 
saying : — "Pleased am I and thou hast shown me enough of 
hospitality. Do thou give up thy wrath. t Business wants 
me to go soon and the time is well-nigh spent. Besides f 
have promised that I shall not halt at any intermediate 
place.” Thereupon touching the hill with his hand that 
highly energetic monkey wended, smiling, his aerial way. 
Thereat the ocean and the mountain respectfully looked to- 
wards him and adored and welcomed him with blessings 
worthy of the occasion. Leaving the mountain and the 
ocean and rising high up, he proceeded in the dear welkia 
traversing the aerial way.J Rising high up and casting his 
look down on the hill, that foremost of monkeys proceeded 
by the unsupported serial track. Beholding this singularly 
arduous work of Hanum&n, the celestials, the Siddhas and the 
ascetics all praised him. All the celestials and others living 
on its summit, were highly pleased with the mountain arrayed 
in gold and having beautiful sides. And the thousand-eyed 
Vasava was also pleased. And greatly pleased that highly 
intelligent Sachi’s lord, himself, addressed that best of moon- 
tains having picturesque sides, saying ‘‘Greatly delighted 
am I, O lord of mountains, O thou having golden peaks. ‘No 



* For his relationship with Wind whose son was Hanum&n. — T. i 

f Wrath in consequence of his inability to accept his offerings.—' T. 

X Pitupanthanam — the text means "his father's path"— Wind being Him* 
min’s father the passage means — “atrial way.”— T. 



i 



SVNDA RAKlNDAM. 



883 



fear 1 I do declare unto thee. Proceedest thou therefore, at 
thy ease, O gentle one ! Greatly hast thou helped Hanuman, 
crossing fearlessly and unceasingly, over hundred yoyanas 
so that he migh* not fall in danger. This monkoy, is goiug 
in the interests of Rama, Da9aratha’s son — and thou hast 
welcomed hi n to the best of thy might. Therefore I am 
greatly pleased with thee.” Beholding that lord of celestials 
the performer or an hundred sacrifices, highly gratified, that 
best of mountains attained to an excess of joy. And having 
received boons (from Indra) the Mountain occupied again 
its pristine place. And Hanuman in a short time crossed 
over the main. Thereupon the celestials along with Gan- 
dharvas, Siddhas and the ascetics, spake unto Suras£ the 
mother of serpents, resembling the Sun, saying : — “The 
highly effulgent son of Wind named Hanuman is crossing 
over the main. Thou art required to throw obstacles in his 
way for a while. Assuming therefore the semblance of a 
terrible, grim visaged R&kshasa, resembling a huge mountain 
end having terrible teeth and a face with coppery eyes, do thou 
touch the welkin. We are anxious to learn if lie defeateth 
thee by some means or cometh by grief.” Thus addressed the 
Worshipful SurasS, having been honored by the celestials, 
deformed and horrible and capable of exciting the fear of all 
beings, and obstructing Hanuman as he was coursing on, 
Wrid,— “O foremost of monkeys, thou hast been ordained as 
Wy fare by the gods themselves. I will eat thee up, — do thou 
Outer my mouth. Even this is the boon that was conferred on 
We by the Deity.” Having delivered herself thus speedily, 
the opening her mouth wide, stood before the son of the 
Wind-gpd." Thus accosted by Surasa, (Hanuman) with a 
{lad countenance, said, — “Rama, son unto Da9aratha, had 
mtered the Dandaka forest in company with his brother, 
*akshmana, and his wife, Vaidehi. He having created 
ostility with the Rakshasas, his illustrious wife, Sita, while 
e was engrossed in some work, was carried away by Ravana. 




RlMlVANA. 



884 

At R&ma’s command, I go to her as his envoy. It behovelb 
thee, living in (Rama’s) dominions, to lend him thy help. 
Or having seen Mithil&'s daughter, as well as Rftma of 
untiring deeds, I will enter thy mouth. This I promise thee 
truly.” Thus addressed by Hanum&n, SurasS, capable of 
wearing forms at will, said, — ‘‘None shall pass me without 
being devoured by me, — even this is the boon that I have 
received.” Then seeing him go away, the mother of the 
NSgas, Surasa, derious of essaying the strength of Hanum&n, 
spoke. “O best of monkeys, thou shalt have to go, to-day, 
after entering my mouth. Even this is the boon that was 
conferred on me by the Deity." Having said this swiftly, 
she extending her capacious mouth wide, stood in front of 
the wind-god’s son. Thus addressed by SurasS, that fore- 
most of monkeys, waxing wroth, said, — ‘‘Extend thy mouth so, 
that thou mayst contain me.” Having said this unto SurasS, 
having her mouth measuring ten yoyanas , H&num&n enlarged 
himself as many yoyanas Thereat-Surasi enlarged her month 
twenty yoyanas. And beholding her* extended mouth witha 
long tongue, wondrous dreadful, like unto hill itself, and re- 
sembling clouds, measuring twenty yoyanas , the intelligent 
son of the wind-god, HanumSn, enlarged, made himself 
measure thirty yoyanas . Threat, Suras&, extended her 

mouth forty yoyanas , and thereupon the heroic Hanumln 
attained the altitude of fifty yoyanas. And Suras& enlarged 
her mouth sixty yoyanas ; and the heroic Hanum&n mod 
heightened himself seventy yoyanas . And SurasS widened 
her mouth eighty yoyanas ; and Hanum&n like unto Fire 
raised himself ninety yoyanas . Ar.d Surasd enlarged her 
mouth an hundred yoyanas . Thereat diminishing his person 
like unto a cloud, the wind-god’s son at that moment 
measured one thumb only. Then entering her month and 
coming out of it, that exceedingly powerful and graceful 

* Tat dristwd — Seeing this , occurs twice in this passage, I mdwit 
once only. — T. 



SUH DA RA RANDAN. 



885 



' One, stationing himself in the sky spoke thus. **0 des-' 
■ Cendant of Daksha, I have entered into thy mouth. I 
' bow down unto thee. I will repair to where Vaidehi is. Thy 
boon hath proved true. Seeing him out of her mouth like 
‘ the Moon out of the mouth of Rahu, the venerable Surasd 
spoke unto the monkey in her native form, saying, — “For 
compassing thy end, go, O foremost of monkeys, O mild 
one, at thine ease. And bringing unto Vaidehi tidings 
touching the high-souled RSghava do thou meet her.” 
Witnessing that third act* of HanumSn's hard to perform, 
all beings extolled the monkey exclaming, “Excellent ! 
Excellent !” Then he, resembling the wind in rush, arrived 
at the irrepressible ocean — abode of Varuna — went on, enve- 
loping the welkin, on the aerial way, visited by showers, 
ranged by fowls and Gandharbas, graced by the iris ; embelli- 
shed by shining vehicles rolling on, drawn by lions, or 
elephants, or tigers, or bird-serpents; presided over by 
eminently pious and righteous persons who have won 
the regions of heaven ; and therefore appearing as if 
adorned by the (five) Fires; of the touch of Agani or Vayra ; 
(ever) served by Fire bearing sacrificial oblations; garnished 
by planets and stars and astral luminaries, and the Sun 
and the Moon ; thronged with Maharshis, and Gandharbas 
and Nigas, and Yakhas ; and pure, and speckless ; — the 
support of the universe — inhabited by Vifwavasu ; lorded 
over by the elephants of the king of the celestials ; the 
orbit of the Sun and Moon, endowed with auspiciousness 
constituting the canopy of this live world ; blameless ; and 
made by BrahmS. ; crowded with countless heroes, and 
VidySdharas. And the wind-god's son HanumSn, scattering 
clouds like the very Wind himself, coursed on in the aerial 
way like Garuda. And mighty clouds, hued like Kaldguruf 

* The third feat, remarks Ram&nuya, is Hanuman's issuing out of Sura si’s 
mouth. The preceding two are not mentioned. — T. 
f A kind of alco or agallochum. — Wilson.—' T. 





886 



RlMlVANA. 



red, and yellow and sable, on being dispersed by the monkey, 
burst into brilliance. And again and again entering into 
the clouds and emerging out of them, lie resembled the Moon 
during the rains now entering (into clouds) and now issuing 
out of them. And everywhere HanumSn, son unto the wind- 
god coursing through the unsupported sky, looked like 
the monarch of mountains furnished with wings. And it 
came to pass that beholding him in the act of bounding, a 
Rakshasi named Sinhika, of great age, and capable of wea- 
ring forms at will, thought within herself, — “Today after a 
long lapse of time I shall have my fare. This mighty creature 
hath after a long time come within my power.” Having 
thought thus in her mind, she seized (HanumSn's) shadow.* 
On his shadow being secured, the monkey reflected,— “As 
a mighty bark is retarded in its course in the sea by 
adverse wind, have I, my prowess paralysed, been suddenly 
obstructed in my career.” Then looking above and below 
and sideways, the monkey saw a mighty creature arisen 
from the salt waters. And seeing that one of a distorted 
countenace, the wind-god's son thought, — “This one is, 
without doubt, the creature of wonderful form, possessed of 
exceeding prowess, — given to securing its prey by means 
of its shadow, — which had been described by the monkey-king. 
And concluding her to be Sinhik& from her act,t the intelli- 
gent monkey attaining a gigantic body, increased himself, 
like a mass of clouds during the rains. And seeing the 
enlarged body of the mighty monkey, she extended her 
mouth measuring the sky and the nether regions. And roar- 
ing like unto a mass of clouds, she rushed against the monkey. 
Thereat, that intelligent and mighty monkey marked her 
deformed and huge mouth, her body and its asticulated mem- 
bers. And the redoubtable monkey hard as the thunderbolt, 

* BrahtnA had conferred on her a boon that she should secure her prey by 
pulling at it by means of its shadow.— T. 

t i. e. of securing his shadow . — 7*. 





SUNDARA K AND AM. 



887 



contracting himself in a moment, threw himself into her 
mouth. And the Siddhas and Charanas saw him sink in her 
mouth, as the full Moon is taken by RShu during a Parva. — 
Then tearing her limits by means of his sharp claws, the 
monkey, endowed with the celerity of thought, vehemently 
sprang forward. Then slaying her by his acuteness of 
sight, endurance and skill, that heroic, self-controlled monkey 
again began to swell himself amain. Her heart having been 
crushed out by Hanum&n, she, rendered lifeless, fell into 
the water. The self-create had created him for compassing 
her destruction. And seeing Sinhika speedily slain by the 
monkey, and fallen, creatures ranging the sky addressed 
that foremost of monkeys, saying, — “Terrible is the deed 
that thou hast performed to day. Mighty was the creature 
that hath been slaughtered by thee. Compass thou thine 
wished-for end without let, O foremost of monkeys. He, O 
chief of monkeys, that, like thee, is endowed with endurance, 
sharp sightedness, sense, and ability, doth not feel depressed 
in action . 11 Honored by these and wished well as to his 
purpose, that monkey, worthy of being honored, set out, 
enveloping the sky, like him that subsisteth on serpents.* 
And it came to pass that as he had almost arrived at the 
other shore (of the ocean), he looking about on all sides at 
the end of an hundred yoyanas saw a range of woods. And 
as he went on. that best of monkeys saw an island decked 
with diverse trees, and groves pertaining Malaya. And he 
surveyed the sea, and lands bordering thereon, and trees 
growing on the sea shore, and the countenances of the 
spouses of the Sea. And surveying his own person resem- 
bling a mighty mass of clouds, and as if closing up the sky, 
that self-possessed one ascertained his course of action/’. 
Soon as the R^kshasas shall behold my enlarged body and 
the vehemence of my motion, they shall be seized with 
curiosity concerning me.” Thus thought that magnanimous 



* Garuda. 





838 



rAma fan a. 



one. Thereat diminishing that person o( his resembling a 
mountain, that self-possessed one, purged of ignorance, resum- 
ed his natural shape. And diminishing that form into the 
smallest compass, Hanuman remained in his native form, 
like that depriver of Vaii’s prowess, Hari, after he had placed 
his three steps. And thus wearing various graceful forms, 
that one, acting after reflection, having come to the other 
shore of the ocean incapable of being reached by others,— 
on looking over his (immensely magnified person), reduced 
his body ^to its former size). And that higli-souled one 
resembling a cloudy pavilion, alighted on the (foremost) 
summit of the splendid mountain, Samva j crested with 
picturesque peaks ; and abounding in ketakas , udddlakas and 
cocoanuts. And reaching the shore of the sea, and beholding 
Lanka on the top of that foremost of mountains, the monkey, 
renouncing his native form, fell on that mountain, agitating 
birds and beasts. And having by main force bounded over 
the ocean heaving with surges, and rife with D&navas and 
Panagas, he alighting on the shore of the mighty main, be- 
held Lanka like unto Amaravati. 




SVNDA RAKlNDAM. 



889 



SECTION II. 



Having crossed over the ocean incapable ol being 
epressed, that one endowed with great strength, staying at 
be plateau of Chitrakuta, and having refreshed himseif f cast 
is eyes on Lanka. And covered with showers of blossoms 
loured down by the trees, that monkey possessed of prowess 
hen appeared there like Pushpamaya * And having cleared 
ji hundred yoyanas, that monkey gifted with first-rate 
irowess, did not heave sighs or feel any fatigue. “I am 
ompetent to bound over many hundreds of yojanas. What 
ben is this end of the ocean measuring an hundred yojanas 
>nly ?” And that foremost of those endowed with energy 
nd the prime of monkeys, — gifted with speed, went to 
*ank£,f having crossed over the mighty main. And seeing 
due lawns, and perfumed woods, replete with honey and filled 
nth mountains, he held his way by the central thoroughfare. 
ind that foremost of monkeys, the energetic HanumSn, went 
>y hills filled with trees, and ranges of blossoming woods. 
Lnd stationing himself in that mountain, the offspring of the 
Vind-god beheld woods and groves and Lanka established 
t the brow of the mountain. And that elephant of a monkey 
urveyed Saralas, and Karnikaras, and dates in full flower, 
°iydlas, Muchulindas, Kutajas and Ketakas , Piyangus 
rarm with aroma, and Nipas, and Saptachchhadas ; Asanas, 
Coviddras, and flowering Karaviras , and trees bearing 
lossoms, filled with swans and Kdrandavas, and covered 
nth lotuses and lilies ; and charming sporting hills J and 
arious watery expanses ; and extensive tracts covered 

* A monkey so named. — T. 

f Descending, remarks the comentator, from the mountain-summit. — T. 

% Sporting hills according to Kataka, According to others, Akrira means a 
ore in general.-— T. 



1 12 



tgo 



RlMlYANA . 



with diverse trees bearing flowers and fruits at all seasons, 
and gardens exceedingly beautiful to behold. And drawing 
near unto Lanka embellished with lilies and environed by 
a moat filled with lotuses, that one graced with auspicious- 
ness, that graceful monkey, Hanum&n, beheld Lank 21 vigilantly 
guarded by R&vana, in consequence of SilS. having been 
carried away, — with R&kshasas bearing fierce bows ranging 
all around, — that mighty and captivating capital surrounded 
by a golden wall, filled with edifices resembling cliffs and 
looking like autumnal clouds, and elevated yellowish high- 
ways ; abounding in hundreds of banners mounted on the 
walls, and beautified with pennons and streamers ; with noble 
golden gateways painted with plants ; and resembling the 
metropolis of the very sovereign of the celestials. And that 
graceful monkey saw Lanka. situated on the top of the 
mountain, filled with splendid yellow-white palaces, like unto 
a city stationed in the sky : ruled by the lord of Rakshasas 
and reared by V^wakarma himself. And the monkey, Hanu- 
man, beheld Lanka, as if moving in the sky : with her walk 
furnished with daises for her hips, the immense waters and 
woods for her cloth, Sataghnis and darts for her hair-ends : 
and pennons on her walls for ear rings, — built as if by the 
agency of the Mind ; and constructed by Vi9wakarma himself. 
And arriving at the Northern gate resembling the mansion 
of Kaila^a, and cleaving, as it were, the welkin, and as if 
holding the firmament with lofty and glorious edifices, and 
observing the sea ; his dreadful enemy, R&vana ; the city 
teeming with poisonous snakes, — as well as the method of 
defence (displayed in it) — the monkey reflected, — "Even if 
the monkeys came here, they should fail to achieve success; 
for Lanka is incapable of being taken in battle by the celes- 
tials themselves. Even if the mighty-armed R&gliava should 
reach this terrible-looking and impregnable Lank& reared by 1 
Ravana,\vhat could he do ? Opportunity find I none either for 
conciliation with the Rakshasas, or for (winning them over)by 




SUN DA RA KIND AM. 



891 



gifts, or for sowing dissensions among them, or for conquer- 
ing them in fight. Of all the monkeys, four only endowed 
with (exceptional) celerity, — viz., V^li's son, Nila, the 
intelligent king, and myself, have the power to come over 
here. When I have ascertained whether Vaidehi is alive 
or not, I shall, after interviewing Janaka’s daughter, think 
about this.” Then that elephantine monkey, stationed on 
the summit of that mountain, for a while bethought himself 
as to the success of Rama.* “I cannot in this form succeed 
in entering the city of the Rakshasas, guarded by wily and 
powerful RSkshasas. I should, while engaged in searching 
for J&naki, deceive all the strong and highly energetic 
R&kshasas gifted with prowess. For attaining this mighty 
object, it behoveth me to enter LankS, at night in a shape 
invisible yet well suited to the end in view.” And beholding 
the city in that state, difficult of being subdued by the 
celestials and Asuras (combined), HanumSn, sighing moment- 
arily, thought within himself, — “How can I, without being 
discovered by the impious lord of RSkshasas, Rfvana, 
succeed in seeing Janaka’s daughter, Maithili ? How can 
the work of R5ma cognizant of self (be so managed 
that it) may not be brought to naught ? How can I see 
Janaka’s daughter singly in secret ? Actions on the very 
eve of success, on being obstructed by adverse season 
and place, and through the agency of unreflecting envoys, 
come to nought, even as darkness is dispelled on sun- 
rise. And in respect of what should be undertaken 
and what not, even the certain decision (of a master assisted 
by his counsellors), because of a heedless messenger, 
doth not appear in all its beauty : messengers (foolish) yet 
proud of their knowledge, bring every business to nought. 
How can I so manage that my business may not suffer? 
How can I avoid recklessness ? How can my bounding over 
the deep bear fruit ? On my being seen by the RSkshasas, 



* About rescuing his wife. — T. 





rAmAfana. 



? 9 ? 

the work of Rama cognizant of self, desirous of the destruc- 
tion of R£vana, shall be marred. Even if I wear a R&kshasa 
form, I cannot anywhere remain undiscovered by the 
Rikshasas. What shall I say of any other form ? Even the 
wind, I conceive., doth not stray here, unperceived. Nothing 
whatever is here that is unknown to the R&kshasas of 
redoubtable deeds. Should I stay here embodied in my 
native form, I shall come by destruction ; and the interest 
also of my master shall suffer. Therefore, diminishing myself, 
I shall at night, for compassing the welfare of R&ghava, 
enter Lanka in my own form. Entering at night R&vana's 
capital difficult of access, I shall, obtaining entry into every 
dwelling seek Janaka's daughter. ,, Having made up his 
mind thus, the heroic Hanum£n, extremely eager to see 
Vaidehi, wished for the setting of the sun. On the snn 
having set, at night the Wind-god's son, contracting 
his person, reducing himself to the dimensions of a cat, 
became wonderful to behold. And at dusk, the powerful 
Hanuman, springing up, entered the charming city of Lankl 
with its well divided highways ; furnished with rows of 
edifices having golden pillars, and net-works, — resembling 
the metropolis of the Gandharbas. And he saw that splendid 
city containing seven-storied and eight-storied edifices, 
studded with crystal and adorned with gold. And the 
dwellings of the Rikshasas were embellished with these 
(ornaments). And graceful golden gateways belonging to 
the Rakshasas everywhere lent splendour unto Laokl 
adorned all over. Beholding Lankfi, wonderful and of 
inconceivable loveliness, the mighty monkey, desirous of 
beholding Vaidehi, became depressed and delighted at the 
same time. And he (entered Lanka) engarlanded with yellow 
edifices joined together, with the ornamented arches of her 
gateways furnished with nets of precious gold ; famed (dl 
over the world) ; ruled by the arm of R&vana, and vigilantly 
guarded by night-rangers of dreadful strength. And at 




5 UN DA RAKA NDA At. 



893 



if ministering unto him,* the Moon furnished with many 
thousands of rays arose with the stars in the midst of the sky, 
spreading lunar light over all creatures. And that heroic 
monkey beheld the Moon possessing the sheen of a conch, 
and hued like milk or the lotus-stalk, arisen and afloat (in 
the welkin), like a swan swimming in a tank. 



SECTI ON ill. 



.A.SSUMING the quality of goodness and energy on 
mount Lamva furnished with elevated summits, and re- 
sembling long masses of clouds, Hanum&n, son unto the 
Wind-god capable of concluding in harmony with season, 
possessed of exceeding strength — an elephant among 
monkeys — entered Lank£ by night, affluent with charm- 
ing woods and waters — the city governed by RAvana ; 
beautified with edifices resembling autumnal clouds ; sound- 
ing like unto Vita pS vatit herself — with infuriated elephants 
(stationed) at her graceful gateways ; containing white gates 
with ornamented arches ; resembling the handsome Bhogavati 
inhabited and protected by serpents. And suddenly coming 
to that (city) resembling Amaravati, scattered with clouds 
charged with lightning, having hosts of luminaries, and 
tumultuous with the roars of blustering blasts, — girt round 
by a mighty golden wall, — ringing with the tinklings of tiny 
bells ; and embellished with pennons, — he growing exceedingly 
exhilarated, made towards the wall. And beholding the city 
all round, furnished with golden doors ; having quadrangular 
courts composed of lapises ; ornamented with plastered 
jeweled pavements studded with all gems, crystals, and 
pearls ; with mad elephants ',of burnished gold and speckless 



* Hanum&n. — T. 

t AlakA, the city ef Kuvera, King of Yakshas.— T. 





894 



KlMlrANA. 



white silver; with stairs of Iapises,— (doors) devoid of dost 
with their centres composed of crystal and with stately halls; 
elegant, — and adjoining mansions seeming as if reaching up 
to the heavens; resounding with Kraunchas and peacocks; fre- 
quented by swans ; and everywhere resonant with the sounds 
of trumpets and ornaments. And then beholding the city 
Lanka, resembling VaswokasSra/* and appearing to mount to 
the welkin, the monkey Hanum£n was filled with rapture. 
And seeing the delightful, divine and prosperous city of 
Lanka belonging to the lord of Rakshasas, that one endowed 
with prowess thought within himself,— “This city protected 
by the forces of R&vana with their hands holding upraised 
arms, is incapable of being forcibly subdued by any other. 
This place can be easily entered by Kumuda, and Angada,as 
well as by that mighty monkey, Sushena ; and also by Mainda 
and Dwivida. And there is way also for the offspring of 
the Sun, and that monkey, Ku^aparva, as well as of that 
foremost of monkeys, Rikshya, and myself.” And having 
witnessed the prowess of R&ghava, as well as the vigor of 
Lakshmana, the monkey was filled with joy. And that 
redoubtable monkey beheld the metropolis of the monarch of 
the RSLkshasas; having for her cloth the sea; for her pendants, 
cow-stalls and stables ; for her breasts, turrets mounted on 
the walls for discharging missils, — decked out like a damsel; 
with her darkness dispelled by bright lights and the mighty 
planets. And as he was entering, that tiger-like mighty 
monkey son unto the Wind-god was met by the city in her 
native shape. And seeing that best of monkeys, Lanlci, ruled 
by R&vana, arising of herself with her countenance rendered 
deformed, stood before the heroic son of the Wind; and, 
emitting a tremendous roar, addressed the offspring of the 
Wind god, saying, — “O thou that hast the woods for thy boa* 
who art thou ? And on what errand hast thou come hither? 
Tell me while yet thou hast thy vital powers left in thee. 



* AlaWU 




SUND A RA KANDAM, 895 

0 monkey, for certain thou art unable to obtain entry into 
this Lank&, protected by the forces of Ravana, and carefully 
guarded on all sides.’ 1 Thereat, the heroic Hanuman spoke 
unto her staying in front of him, — ‘ I shall tell thee all about 
that anent which thou questionest me. Who art thou that 
having deformed eyes stayest at the gate of this city ? And 
what for, O frightful one, dost thou rail at me in wrath ?” 
Hearing Hanum&n’s speech, Lanka, capable of wearing 
forms at will, waxing wroth addressed the Wind-god’s 
offspring, saying,— “I, who am incapable of being repressed, 
abiding by the mandate of the high-souled sovereign of the 
R&kshasas, protect this city. Thou art unable to enter this 
city, passing me by. Thou shalt to-day, losing thy life 
and slain by me, sleep (the sleep of death). O monkey, 

1 am the City of Lank<i, myself. I every way guard (all 
that is here. 1 ’; Hearing Lanka’s words, Hanuman, son 
unto the Wind-god, — foremost of monkeys — exerting him- 
self (to secure victory), stood like another hill. And seeing 
her appear in the form of a deformed female, that foremost 
and best of monkeys endeued with intelligence, possessed 
of prowess, said, — “I will behold the city of Lanka, crowned 
with turrets, walls and ornamented arches. It is for this 
that 1 have come here. Great is my curiosity. I come for- 
sooth to see the woods and groves and gardens of Lanki here, 
— as well as her principal edifices.” Hearing these words of 
his, Lank& capable of wearing forms at will, again addressed 
him in a speech fraught with disonant letters : “O thou of 
perverse understanding, O worst of monkeys, without (in the 
hrst instance) vanquishing me, thou canst not to-day behold 
this city ruled by the monarch of the K&kshasas.” Thereat 
that tiger of a monkey said unto that female ranger of the 
night,— “After seeing this city, O gentle one, 1 shall go away 
even as 1 have come.” Thereupon, setting up a mighty and 
terrible roar, Lanka filled with vehemence, struck at Hanuman 
with her palm. And that tiger-like monkey, the energetic 




896 



RlMlFANA. 



offspring of the wind-god, on being lustily struck by Lankl, 
emitted a tremendous roar. And (Hanum&n) fastened the 
fingers of his left hand into a box, and transported with rage, 
dealt it unto her. And considering that she was a female, 
he did not give way to excessive wrath. And struck at (by 
HanumSn\ that ranger of the night, of a deformed face, her 
body overcome, suddenly dropped to the earth. And the 
energetic and heroic Hanum&n, seeing her measure her 
length, — in consideration of her being a female, was filled 
with compassion. Thereat, exceedingly agitated, LanU 
addressed the monkey, Hanum&n, in humble words, with 
their letters faltering , — ‘*0 mighty-armed one, be propitious 
unto me ! Do thou save me, O best of monkeys, O placid one. 
Those that are gifted with strength and are endeued with 
exceeding vigor, ever bear regard unto the dignity of the 
scriptures. By thy prowess, O monkey, hast thou, O hero, 
O thou gifted with wondrous strength, vanquished me myself 
who am the City of Lank£. Listen to this narration, which J, 
O foremost of monkeys, deliver unto thee ; as to how the 
self-create Himself conferred a boon 011 me . 1 When a certain 
monkey shall by his prowess, bring thee under his sway, thea 
shalt thou understand that a fear is come unto the RAkshatuT. 
And that time, O placid one, hath come unto me, in conse- 
quence of my meeting with thee. The truth ordained by the 
self-create knoweth no turning. The destruction of the 
unrighteous king RAvana together with all the R&kshasas, 
hath come about in consequence of SitA (having been carried 
away;. Therefore, O best of monkeys, do thou enter the 
city ruled by Ravana ; and accomplish such tasks as then 
wishest to. Entering this splendid city lying under an ia* 
precation, governed by the chief of the R&kshasas, do thot 
at thy will happily repairing every where, search for the chaste 
daughter of Janaka.” 




SUNDARA KUNDA M. 



897 



SECTION IV. 



FT AVING by his vigor vanquished the excellent City of 
Lankft capable of wearing forms at will, that exceedingly 
energetic foremost of monkeys, HanumSn, eudeued with 
prodigious prowess, leaped sheer over a wall, w f here door- 
way there was none ; and that elephantine monkey gifted 
with great strength entered Lanka by night. And entering 
:he city of Lank!, that one (ever) compassing the welfare 
rf the monkey-king, set his left foot on the heads of his 
oes.* And entering in by night, the offspring of the 
Wind-god furnished with strength, proceeded along the 
high -way strewn with blossoms. And the monkey held his 
way in the charming city of Lanka, resounding with grateful 
sounds mixed with laughter, and ringing with trumpet 
blasts. And w r ith multitudes of mansions marked with the 
Jiunderbolt and the hook, and adorned with diamond w in- 
lows, the charming metropolis looked splendid, like the 
welkin with clouds. And then Lanka, with handsome and 
variegated mansions of R&kshasas, resembling white clouds 
and arranged like lotus-leaves ; and adorned on all sides with 
structures superscribed ‘Vardliam£na,’ shone forth in all its 
glory. And that graceful one serving in the interests of the 
king of monkeys, ranging for Rama’s behoof, beheld (Lanka) 
adorned with variegated wreaths ; and was highly delighted. 
And moving from house to house, that foremost of monkeys 
observed on all sides various dwellings of diverse forms and 

* The literal meaning is that, leaping over the wall, Hanum&n first set his 
left foot on the hostile soil ; and this act of his, as tending to the discomfiture 
Bf the foe, is looked upon by the author in the light of Hanum&n setting his left 
foot on the heads of the R&kshasas. The setting of the left foot on an enemy's 
loainions, is considered by the scriptures as very inauspicious. — T. 



“3 





898 



rXmItaNa . 



color, and heard charming songs chanted in the three octaves* 
by damsels maddened with amour, resembling celestial 
Apsaras. And he also heard the jinglings of zones and the 
clash of bangles ; and sounds of footsteps on stairs of edi&ces 
belonging to high-souled ones ; and sounds proceeding from 
clapping hands; and the roaring of lions here and there. And 
(Hanuman) heard there in the mansions of the Rakshas, Ha*. 
tras recited by persons engaged therein, and those occupied is 
Vaidika studies. And (Hanumhn) saw goblins and R&kshasm 
storming and eulogizing Rfivana ; and mighty swarms of 
Rakshas stationed, covering the highway. And in the 
central courtyard, he found innumerable spies of the Rikshasa 
(Rfivana), some initiated, some bearing matted locks, some 
with their heads shaven, and some clad in cow*skins, some 
in cloths and some going stark naked ; and (be found there 
persons) carrying handfuls of darbha for their weapons, and 
(having) the sacrificial fire-place for their arms ;and those bear- 
ing in their hands clubs and concealed weapons,t or holding 
rods as their aims, or having a single eye or a single com- 
plexion, X or having a single breast dangling down ; and those 
looking dreadful with uneven attire ;§ and dwarfs frightful to 
behold ; and bowmen ; and swordsmen ; and (warriors) earn- 
ing sataghnis and clubs for their arms ; those bearing 
excellent parighas in their hands, or blazing in curium 
mail; persons not exceedingly fat, or exceedingly lean; 
not unduly tall, or unduly short ; not extremely fair, or 
extremely dark ; not unduly crooked, or unduly dwarfish; 
and those deformed, or many-formed, or endowed with 

* The three octaves referred to are Mandra or the base tone, JMtypes 
or the middle tone, and Tdra or the high tone. These constitute the «£• 
diapason of Hindu Music. — T. 

t Kuta. The commentator says the word stands for a particular kia4^ 
weapons. Wilson has concealed weapon for its English equivalent,— T. 

t The same complexion gives sense. But I render the passage literally.— T. 

S Bh ugn zvastr&n . — Perhaps the text is corrupt. Bhugnav*ktrkm—jm0*4 
deformed faces — would render sense. — T. 



SUNDA RA KIND AM. 



899 



beauty, or possessing splendour ; standard bearers ; and 
flag bearers. And (Hanuman) saw also various weapons ; 
"and those having for their arms darts and vrikshas , or 
bearing pattigas and asanis % or having Kshcpanis * and 
aooses in their hands, saw that mighty monkey, or wearing 
wreaths, or having their persons daubed with pastes, or 
adorned with noble ornaments, or clad in various kinds of 
raiment; and many a one ranging wherever he listed ; 
and those holding sharpened javelins; and mighty ones 
bearing Vajras\ and hundreds and thousands of warriors 
garrisoned in the central courtyard and engaged in vigilantly 
guarding the interior, — having been directed by the lord 
of the Rakshas, — saw the monkey. And having seen that 
edifice situated in front of the inner appartment, that 
mighty monkey saw the famous mansion of the R&kshasa 
chief, pinnacled on the mountain-top, with huge golden 
arches over the gateway; surrounded by a moat enriched 
with pale lotuses ; and completely guarded by a wall ; 
resembling heaven itself; magnificent; resonant with grate- 
ful sounds; resounding with the neighing of horses and 
wondrous steeds; and adorned with cars and vehicles, chariots 
and dainty horse: elephantst; and four-tusked elephants 
resembling masses of white clouds ; — and possessing graceful 
gateways. And the monkey entered the palace protected 
by the R&kshasa chief, — guarded by maddened beasts and 
birds, and thousands of goblins endowed with exceeding 
great prowess. And he (Hanuman) entered Ravana’s inner 
apartment girt round with a wall consisting of blazing gold 
and Jdmvunada ;{ having its top decorated with costly gems 
and pearls ; and worshipped with excellent black Aguru 
and sandal. 

• A short arrow thrown from the hand, or shot through a tube. Wilson.*— 7*. 

f Elephants of the size of horses. — T. 

X Jdmmuuad a is a kind of gold having sixteen diverse colors.— T 



900 



KiMlVANA. 



SECTION V. j 

— > i -< 

,A_nd as if ministering unto him (Hanum&n), arose the 
many thousand-rayed Moon in the midst of the stars, enfold- 
ing all creatures with his luminous canopy. And that highly 
heroic monkey beheld the Moon hued like the sheen of conch, 
or milk, or lotus-stalk, arisen and afloat (in the heavens),— 
like a swan swimming in a pool. And that intelligent one 
from the earth beheld the Moon arrive at the mid*beavens ; 
momentarily beaming out in luuar light; appearing (splendid) 
as if in conjunction with the Sun himself, — and like a ball 
loitering in his stall. And he saw the mild-raved (Moon), ! 
chasing away the remorse of all ; swelling the sea ; and j 
displaying all creatures, — attain the middle of the sky. And | 
that Lakshmi who on earth remains on Mandara, at eve in 
the sea, and on the lotus on water, looked exceedingly lovely, 
stationed beside the charming Moon. Like a swan in a silver 
cage, like a lion in a cave in Mandara, like a hero on a haughty 
elephant, appeared the Moon in the middle of the sky. And 
with (the mark of) the horn * the Moon resembled a sharp* 
horned bull, or a mighty white-hued hill with towering 
summits, or an elephant with his horns plated with gold. 
And, with his dirt composed of particles of cool water 
removed ; and the darkness dispelled in consequence of the 
vicinity of the mighty planet ;t and with his spots appearing 
clear because of his shining appearance, appeared (the hare* 
marked % worshipful Moon in full splendour. And like a lion on 
coming out of his cavern, or a lordly elephant on entering into 
the thick of a mighty encounter, or a monarch on obtaining 
a kingdom, — appeared the Moon in full splendour. And now 



* The sun. It is a planet in Hindu cosmogony. — T. 
i The spots arc fabled as the marks of hares on the lap of the Moon.— T. 




SUNDA RAKl'NDA M. 



901 



appeared the revered Mid-night, chasing away darkness with 
the Moon displayed, — when flesh-eating (Rakshasas) lend 
full liberty to their vicious appetite for flesh ; and when 
disputes between lovers cease,* — and which bringeth down 
heaven itself.f The sounds of strings sweet unto the ear 
spread around ; females sleep beside their husbands ; and 
night-rangers, given to astounding and terrible acts, are, in the 
same way, out, indulging in their sports. And the intelligent 
monkey saw mansions crowded with (Rakshasas), some in- 
ebriate with wine and others with wealth ; and abounding in 
cars and horses and golden seats ; and fraught with the grace 
got of heroism. And (Rakshasas) were parleying, — moving 
about their plump arms, — railing at each other ; and throwing 
intemperate speeches at each other. And (Hanum3.n saw) 
Rakshasas striking at their chests (by way of challenge), 
sinking on the persons of their beloved, wearing diverse 
habiliments, or stretching their tough bows. And (he) saw 
debonair damsels daubing their frames with pastes ; and 
others, again, sleeping, — and fair-faced wenches smiling, — and 
others sighing hard under the influence of anger. And with 
gigantic elephants roaring, (the place), honored by pious 
persons, — with its heroes heaving sighs} — looked exceeding- 
ly beautiful like a lake in which serpents are sighing forth. 
And in that apartment (Hanuman) saw persons of commanding 
understandings^ endowed with a soft tongue, — instinct with 
the spirit of reverence — the foremost men of all this world, — 
and bearing euphonious appelations.and clad in diverse attires. 
And beholding those well-formed people, whose conduct was 
of apiece with their many virtues, (Hanuman) rejoiced exceed- 



* #. e. in consequence of sleep. — T. 

f A beautiful characterization of sleep, reminding one powerfully of 
“Macbeth hath murdered sleep,” &c. — T. 

% In expectation of an access of warriors. — T. 

$ According to the commentator, Vuddhipradhdndtt means persons possess- 
ing many virtues . I differ from him. — T. 





901 



kXmXfana. 



ingly. And he saw some having beautiful forms ; and others 
deformed, — and both possessed of splendour. And (Hanutnio) 
saw there their wives worthy of noble ornaments and endow* 
ed with eminent beauty ; of spotless character ; possessing 
great potency; like unto stars in point of excellency of coo* 
duct, — displaying side-glances and other tokens of dalliance, 
— engaged in dear drinking. And at dead of night HanumSn 
saw some females blazing in beauty, affected simultaneously with 
bashfulness and bliss, on being embraced by their para- 
mours, like birds embracing their mates. And the sensible 
HanumSn saw there other females seated in stately halls,— 
lying in happiness on the laps of their lovers, — beloved of 
their lords — intent on virtue, — married women, — under the 
influence of Madana. And HanumSn saw some without 
sheets, like unto golden streaks, — paragons among women— 
of the hue of molten gold, — and some of a moon -like com- 
plexion, endeued with loveliness, — bereft of their beloved 
And that exceedingly heroic monkey saw females in their 
homes experiencing the height of joy in the company of their 
beloved dear unto their souls; charming with blossoms; 
filled with gladness ; and enchaining the hearts of their lords 
with their loveliness. And HanumSn saw crowds of faces 
like unto the Moon displayed, — with elegant eyes furnished 
with lovely lashes, and side-long looks; and multitudes of 
ornaments resembling beautiful lines of lightning. Bat 
HanumSn saw not Sits, of the highest lineage,— ever 
abiding by the way of righteousness ; born in a royal 
line, — like unto a delightful and wellbegot plant,— 
of a slender frame, — sprung from the mind (of BrahmS, him- 
self) ; established on the eternal road (of chastity) ; having 
her gaze fixed on Rama; always engrossed in the contem- 
plation of Rama, — the mind itself of her lord, — who had 
entered through and through into the heart of her gracefal 
lord, — ever superior to all other women; oppressed with 
the grief of separation ; and having her throat afflicted with 




SUNDA RA KlNDAM. 



9°3 



the vapour of grief ; who formerly had her throat graced 
with that best of ornaments — the nishka ; of excellent eye- 
lashes ; having a mellifluous voice; like unto a peahen ranging 
in the woods; (now) like unto an indistinct lunar lining, 
or a streak of gold covered with dust, or the color of a 
sore-scar, or a gold-leaf broken off by the wind. And not 
finding, (after so long a search) the Sit& of the lord of men, — 
the spouse of R&ma; best of those skilled in speech the 
monkey, deeming himself as having suddenly lost his skill in 
search, was overwhelmed with sadness. 



SECTION VI. 



W ENDING about at will on the roofs of seven-storied 
edifices, that monkey capable of assuming any form that he 
chose, began to range LankH, with speed. And (at length) 
that auspicious one arrived at the mansion of the R&kshasa 
chief, surrounded by a shining wall hued like the Sun ; 
protected by terrible Rakshasas, like a mighty forest by lions. 
And as that foremost of monkeys saw the mansion, with 
fretted arches plated with silver and embellished with gold, — 
beautifully abounding in splendid courts and gateways ; 
containing elephant-drivers, and heroes knowing no fatigue ; 
ever coursed by irrisistible steeds drawing cars, and curious 
vehicles, Covered over with skins of lions and tigers, resound- 
ing with bells hung thereon, and embosoming effigies of 
ivory, gold and silver, — the locality of mighty cars, and the 
home of mighty car-warriors; filled all around with many 
thousands of divers beauteous and dainty birds and beasts; well 
protected by meek R&ksha warders at the outskirts ; throng- 
ed about with magnificent dames of the first order ; 
containing gems of joyous damsels — the abode of the 
foremost R&kshasas— sounding like the sea with the sounds 




904 



RlMlVA NA. 



of superb ornaments ; affluent with regal insignia and 
excellent sandals ; crowded with mighty ones, like a vast 
forest with lions ; reasonant with trumpets and drums ; and 
ringing with the blares of conchs ; where the ever adored 
offspring of the Parvas was always worshipped by the 
Rakshasas ; solemn like the sea ; and resounding like the 
ocean itself, — the mighty mansion of the high-souled(R&vana); 
clad in costly jewels $ scattered with precious gems— as that 
mighty monkey beheld (Ravana's residence), he set about 
searching for Sita * And that mighty monkey concluded, “This 
is the ornament of LankS. bodied forth beautifully to the view, 
covered with elephants, steeds and chariots.” And there 
in the vicinity of Ravana's mansion, t HanumSn began to 
range the dwellings of the Rakshasas from one to auother, 
as well as all the gardens (located there). And without 
experiencing any agitation, he observing (everything), ranged 
the palaces. Then that one endowed with wondrous motion, 
with a bound entered Prahasta’s palace ; and then with 
another, that (monkey) possessed of energy entered the abode 
of MahapSr^wa. Then that mighty monkey entered into 
the abode of Kumbhakarna, resembling a mass of clouds ; 
and thereafter that of Vibhishana ; and then that of Maho- 
dara, and then that of VirupUksha $ and then the abode of 
Vidyujjibha, and then that of VidyunmSlSL ; — and then that 
mighty monkey with a bound entered into the abode of 
Vahudanshtra. And then that leader of monkey-bands 
gifted with great speed leapt into the abode of &uka, and 
next into that of the intelligent Sarana, and next into that 
of Indrajit. And that foremost of monkeys went to the 
mansion of Jambumala, and of Sum£la, — and (then) to 

* The syntactical coherence is, as is natural in so colossal a sentence, 
grievously loose here. I have, however, tried my best to supply the lacuna 
in the passage. — T 

f R&mfinuja says that Han urn tin began to range the dwelling* about the 
wall environing Rdvana's mansion. — T. * 





SUi\DA RaKXNDA M. 905 

the abode of Rashmiketu, and Suryyasachu. And (next) 
that powerful monkey leapt into the mansion of VajrakSya ; 
and (next) the Wind-god’s offspring entered the house 
of Dhumr£ksha, and ( next ) that of Samp5ti, and the 
grim Vidyudrupa, and Phana, and Vighana, and Suka- 
nlbha, and Chakra, and Satha, and Kapatha, and Hraswa- 
karna f and Danshtra, and the R£kshasa Lomasa, and 
Yudhyonmatta, and Matta, and the horseman, Dlnvaja- 
griva, and of Vidyujjibha and Vijibha, and of Hastimukha, 
and of Karila, and Vi^ala, and of Sonit&ksha. The illustrious 
Offsp ring of the Wind, HanumSLn, one after another, leapt 
into all these noble edifices. And that redoubtable monkey 
observed the affluence of all these (Rakshasas; possessed 
of prosperity. And having bounded over the mansions of 
all situated around, that one blessed with auspiciousness, 
at leugth came to the very mansion of the monarch of the 
R&kshasas. And that tiger-like monkey— the best of his 
species — ranging around, saw Rakshasis of frightful eyes, 
alternately mounting sentry over the couch of R5vana — 
bearing darts and maces in their hands, and equipped with 
javelins and clubs. And (there) in the residence of that 
lord of the Rakshasas, he beheld various bands of Rakshasis, 
as well as R&kshasas of gigantic frames, upraising various 
kinds of weapons ; and steeds of exceeding fleelness, red, 
and white, and black j and first-rate elephants, possessed of 
eminent grace, capable of crushing hostile elephants, and 
well trained in arts relative to their species — like Airavata 
himself in conflict.. And there in that mansion he saw (all 
these elephants), destroyers of hostile hosts — like unto pour- 
ing clouds, or hills, sending up fountains, rumbling like 
unto clouds, and invincible in battle by foes. And that 
monkey, son unto the Wind-god, saw in the mansion of the 
lord of Rakshasas, RSLvana, hosts by thousands ; and cars 
of various forms of glittering gold, furnished all over with 
golden net-works, resembling the risen sun ; and graceful 
114 




906 



RlMlYANA. 



grots ; and picture galleries ; and sporting saloons, mount* 
atns composed of wood,* captivating structures dedicated to 
dalliance, and dwellings for day-dalliance, t — saw he in the 
mansion of the R&kshasa monarch. And he beheld that charm- 
ing mansion resembling Mandara, filled with places for pea- 
cocks]:; thronged with pennons and flagstaffs, — a very mine 
of countless gems, — a field of treasures spread around, — where 
persons of intrepid calmness were engaged in acts tending to 
the safety of the treasures, — resembling the mansion herself 
of Kuvera. And on account of the lustre shed by the 
gems, as well as the energy of R&vana himself, that mansion 
appeared splendid like the ray-furnished Sun in all his glory. 
And the chief of monkey-bands saw bed-steads and seats 
of gold and white vessels. And HanumAn entered the 
mighty mansion, containing clay formed by Madha\ and 
Asava;\\ filled with gemmed cans; charming; free from 
impediments ; resembling the mansion herself of KAma, — like 
the abode of Kuvera, — resonant with the sounds of bangles and 
the tinklings of zones, as well as with the beat of mriian % *• 
hides and other eloquent musical instruments ; with palaces 
close on each other ; thronged with hundreds of females (like 
unto) jewels ; and containing capacious enclosures. 

* Designed for sport. — T. 

f The conception of day-dalliance met with in Vidya Sundara of BhSxata 
Chandra Roy f the Bengali poet, is found to have first originated with VU* 
miki. — T. 

% Sportive peacocks. 

% Spirituous liquor distilled from the blossoms of the Bmssi* Imtifdi** 
According to some, a spirit distilled from grapes.— T. 

l| Spirit distilled ftom sugar or molasses.— T. 





SUN DA RA KIND AM. 



907 



SECTION VII. 



A.ND that one endowed with strength saw that row of 
ructurcs fitted up with golden windows, studded with lapis 
eulis, and containing birds ; like unto a mass of clouds in 
season of great rains, crowned with lightning, and fraught 
ith fowls. And he saw various structures close to one 
other, to which excellent conchs, arms and bows lent lustre; 
well as huge and splendid towers belonging to edifices 
sembling mountains. And the monkey beheld mansions, 
tasuring various kinds of wealth, which were held in regard 
both gods and Asuras, — devoid of every defect ; and 
tich had been won (by Rlvana) through his own might.* 
id (HanumSn) saw the mansions of the lord of LankS, 
:ated in strict conformity with aesthetic laws, — appearing as 
they had been constructed by Maya himself, — which had 
the earth beneath every excellence. And then he 
w the mansion of the lord of Rakshas himself, surpassing 
e best structures ; like unto a mass of towering clouds ; 
ptivating ; boasting of a beauteous golden appearance ; 
>rthy of his own power, — and of incomparable loveli- 
ss j appearing as if the celestial regions had drop- 
d down on the earth ; blazing in beauty ; teeming with 
untless gems ; like unto the brow of a mountain strewn 
th the blossoms and the dust thereof of various trees ; and 
iimined by the foremost females, — appearing like a mass 
clouds containing lightning, or the witching welkin 
-nished with grace, afloat with excellent swans. And 
anumSn) saw the car variegated with countless gems ; like 
to the top of a mountain variegated with innumerable 
itals ; or like the firmament garnished with the moon and the 

• Swavalendrj it a m . — Another meaning is : ( mansions ) into which Hanumdn 
td entry through his own might . — T. 





RlMlVANA. 



90S 

planets, — or like clouds of diverse hues fused into a homo- 
geneous whole. The place in the car designed as the seat of 
the many, was filled with rows of hills ;* its hills were filled 
with trees ; its trees were filled with flowers ; and (finally) its 
flowers were filled with leaves and filaments. And (in it), 
where white mansions were reared, there were tanks filled 
with fair flowers ; and lotuses furnished with filaments ; and 
picturesque woods ; and liquid lapses. And the mighty 
monkey beheld there the great chariot going after the name 
of Pushpciy appearing beautiful, wheeling round in the splen- 
dour of the gems — which had surpassed even the cars pertain- 
ing to the abodes of the celestials. And (in that car) were 
birds made of lapis lazulis ; and (other) birds composed of 
silver and coral ; and variegated serpents made of various 
precious metals; and fair-bodied steeds resembling those of 
superior breeds ; and there were constructed birds having 
graceful mouths ; and fair, tapering, playful and contracted 
plumage, bearing blossoms made of coral and gold, — like unto 
the very plumage of Kama himself. And there were elephants 
possessed of graceful trunks, bearing fillaments ; and with 
their trunks bearing lotus leaves, — engaged (in showering 
water on Lakshmi) ; as well as the goddess, made with fair 
arms, seated on a pool with a lotus in her hand. Thus enter- 
ing that graceful mansion, like unto a mountain containing 
charming caverns, (HanumSn) was seized with wonderment. 
And once again (entering that charming mansion), like unto 
a taking and fragrant tree during spring furnished with holes, 
Hanuman was seized with wonderment. Then ranging 
by bounds that honored city ruled by the arms of the Ten- 
faced one, he, not finding the highly regarded and extremely 
distressed daughter of Janaka, who had won over her grief 
by contemplating the virtues of her lord, — (was affected with 
sorrow). And, not seeing Janaka's daughter, then the heart 
of that high-souled one, honored for his character by the 

* Composed of gold and gems. — T. 



SUNDA RA KIND A At. 



909 



world, of schooled self, ever ranging by the way chim- 
1 with morality, and having the scriptures for his eye- 
— as he ranged about, — was oppressed with grief. 



SECTION Vlll. 



TAYING in that mansion, that intelligent monkey, the 
ing of the Wind-god, beheld that splendid aerial car, 
eous with excellent jewels, and furnished with windows 
rnished gold. And the car, embellished with transcend- 
V beautiful figures, — belauded by Vi^vvakarma himself 
nstituting the acme (of his art), — which, mounting the 
1, looked like a mark of the Sun's orbit, — appeared . 
ndent. And there was nothing in that car which was 
ade skilfully ; — nothing that did not look like a precious 

(sprung spontaneously on its person), — and the style 
yed in its various parts surpassed anything that could 
und in the cars of the celestials themselves, — and every- 
in that car was executed in the highest style of excel- 
— (that car) obtained (by RSvana) in virtue of prowess 
y from asceticism and contemplation (of the Deity) ; 
le of repairing wherever (the owner) wished to wend ; 
ying various kinds of constructive skill ; composed of 
ials procured from diverse sources, — such as were worthy 
celestial car; fleet-coursing in consonance with the 
>f its master ; incapable of being approached ;* equal 
the wind in celerity; the source of happiness unto 
ious, high-souled, and pious ones — possessors of 
; fineless't and high rapture ; coursing through the 
lent in a variety of ways, — the congeries of all wonderful 

the impious. Another reading is duravaram — incapable of being 
>d by the enemy. — T. 

U Othtllo. — T. 





9io 



HlMA YANA. 



things, — adorned with ranges of chambers ; captivating to the 
mind ; stainless as the autumnal Moon ; furnished with splendid 
summits, like the crest of a mountain ; which was borne by 
rangers of the night, given to mighty meals, ranging the 
sky, with faces graced with ear-rings ; and by thousands of 
ghosts possessed of terrible speed, having expansive, winkless 
and rolling eyes. That heroic first of monkeys saw that 
excellent car, beauteous with vernal blossoms, — fairer than 
the month of spring and furnished with flowers. 



SECTION IX. 

0:0 

A_nd located within that excellent mansion, HanumlQ, 
son unto the Wind-god, saw a superior and grand structure, 
stainless and spacious ; half a yojana in width and one in 
length, — belonging to the lord of the R£k*hasas, and abound- 
ing with many a palace. And searching for Videha’s daughter, 
the large eyed SitS, that slayer of enemies, Hanum&n, ranged 
all through (this edifice). And HanumSn beheld the goodly 
edifice where the R&kshasas used to dwell in common. 
And (at length) that one came upon the mansion itself of 
the lord of R&kshasas, having three-tusked and four-tusked 
elephants, and protected by persons with upraised arms, 
and covering a capacious area. And (Hftnuman beheld) the 
residence of R&vana, thronged with his R&kshasi wives, 
as well as with princesses forcibly brought thither (by him),— 
like unto the sea teeming with alligators and makaras, abound- 
ing in timingilas and fishes and snakes, and agitated bf 
the force of the wind. The same enchanting splendour tW 
is in Vai^ravana or the ray-riding Moon, remained ever 
constant and abiding in R&vana’s abode. And the pie* 
perity of king Kuvera, or Yama, or Varuna, was here present 
in the house of the Raksha, — or even surpassed .by the pros* 




SUNDA RA KIND AM. 



9 11 

perity (of Ravana). In the midst of that mansion the 
Wind-god’s offspring found another,* excellently constructed, 
having innumerable mad elephants ; — that noble car embell- 
ished with all gems, entitled Pushpaka , which had been 
constructed in heaven by ViswakarmS for Brahm& himself,— 
which Kuvera obtained from the Great-father through high 
austerities, — and which, vanquishing Kuvera by his prowess, 
the RSkshasa chief got possession of. And the mighty monkey 
ascended the splendid car Pushpaka , containing figures of 
wolves, — made of Kdrttaswara and Hiranya ; graced with 
ranges of goodly pillars ; as if blazing in splendour; through- 
out garnished with narrow secret rooms and saloons, piercing 
the heavens, and resembling Meru or Mandara, and like unto 
the flaming Sun ; skilfully reared by Vigwakarma ; with 
golden staircases and graceful and grand raised seats, rows of 
golden and crystal windows, and daises composed of sapphires, 
emeralds and other superb gems ; embellished with noble 
vidrumas, costly stones, and round pearls, as also with 
plastered terraces ; pasted with red sandal, like unto gold, 
and furnished with a sacred aroma; and resembling the sun 
new risen. And stationed thereon, t Hanuman smelt the rich 
odour of viands and drinks that was spreading on all sides ; — 
and like one dear friend smelling another, he also smelt 
the mighty Air, impregnated with aroma, which seemed like 
embodied Odour. And (the Air) said unto HanumSn, — ‘‘Come 
here, where that R&vana is.” Then (descending form Push - 
paka and repairing to that sleeping apartment of R&vana), 
Hanuman saw the same, grand and graceful ; belonging to 
Rlvaua ; of transcendent beauty ; comely like unto a lovely 
lady ; diversified with jewelled staircases ; illumined with heaps 
of gems ; with its terraces constructed of crystal ; having 

• The car Pushpaia t according to Tirtha, whose view is accepted by 
Rimdnoja. According to Kataka, Vesma means a bedchamber of husband 
and wife. — T, 

t i. e. on Pushpaka. — T. 





912 



RkAJlYANA. 



statues of ivory, pearls, diamonds, coral, silver and gold ; 
adorned with jewelled pillars; and embellished all round with 
pillasters ; and upheld on all sides by straight, elevated and 
gorgeously ornamented pillars of equal dimensions, resem- 
bling prodigious wings, — (the mansion) appearing to tower 
to the sky ; containing spacious and parti-colored woolen 
cloths bearing the marks of the Earth* ; extensive as the 
Earth is, with kingdoms and dwellings ; resounding with the 
roars of infuriated elephants ; redolent of divine fragrance; 
furnished with gay canopies ; inhabited by the sovereign of 
the Rakshas ; cloudy with aguru and dhupa ; spotless ; 
of a swan-like whiteness ; engarlanded with flowers anti 
leaves like unto the dappled and brilliant cow (of Vasishtha) ; 
bringing delight unto the heart ; and enhancing the grace 
(of all creatures); removing sorrow ; noble; and the generatrix 
of Grace herself. And as soon as Hanum&n entered the 
mansion protected by RSvana, it like a mother regaled his 
senses with their proper objects. “This must be swarga , or 
the region of the immortals, or the city of Amar&vati, or the 
supreme Siddhi — "t thought the Wind-god's offspring. And 
he saw the golden lamps (shorn of their brightness ), % hke 
unto gamblers worsted at dice by others exceedingly skilful 
and, in consequence, plunged in thought. And (Hanumfln) 
conceived that (Ravana’s sleeping apartment) was in a 
conflagration, on account of the display of the lamps, 
R&vana’s energy, and the splendour of the ornaments. And 
when the night had been half spent, (Hanum&n) saw thousands 
of superb dames, adorned in various attires, and bearing 
apparels of diverse hues, and wreaths,— who having gW* a 
up sport, and come under the influence of wine and sleep,*’* 

* i. r. four-cornered, The Earth, in Hindu cosmogony, is a flat wh® 
having four corners. — T. 

t Swarga is the region where persons reap the fruit of Jyot i s ht o ii ^ 
Siddhi is Illusion spread by Gandharbas. — T. 

t By the superior splendour of Ravana. — T. 



SVNDA RA KIND A Af. 



^3 

were fast asleep on woolen sheets. And in consequence of 
the silence that reigned (in that apartment) embellished 
with (ornaments), it resembled a large lotus-grove, where 
the swans and the black bees are silent. And the Wind-god’s 
offspring beheld the countenances of those beauteous women, 
with closed eyes, — having their lashes shut through languor > 
and odorous with lotus-perfume. And their faces appeared 
like lotuses blowing on the expiry of night and closing 
their petals by night. “These lotus-faces like unto very lotuses 
themselves, ever the six-footed ones* seek once and again.” 
Thus thought with discrimination the graceful, mighty 
monkey ; and on account of their perfections, he confessed 
those countenances to be equal to water-sprungf (lotuses). 
And that apartment, in consequence of being graced by 
those women, appeared splendid, like the autumnal, complacent 
sky decorated with the stars. And surrounded by them, 
the RSkshasa chief resembled the fair Moon encircled by 
the stars. “Those stars that drop from the firmament on 
their virtue deteriorating, have assembled here in a body,” 
thus thought the monkey at that time. And the shine, form, 
and splendour of those females resembled, forsooth those 
of magnificently displayed, noble and lustrous stars. And 
on account of their having been bereft of consciousness 
through sleep, induced by fatigue brought on by drink (and 
dauce), their hair was dishevelled, and their full wreaths 
and goodly ornaments lay scattered about. And some 
of those paragons had got their beauty-spots, smudged ; and 
some, their bangles loosening off; some, their chains running 
to one side. And others had their pearl necklaces burst, — 
and their cloths getting away (from their persons), and the 
chains of their zones straying irregularly ; — resembling way- 
worn mares. And others again were without their ear-rings, 
and had their garlands torn and crushed ; and resembled 

* Shatpada — six-footed — a name of the black bee. — T. 

f Salilodbhavas, — water-sprung — a name of the lotus. — T. 



M 5 



RlMlVANA . 



9*4 

blossoming creepers, trodden down in a vast forest by mighty 
elephants. And the pearl chains of some shining females re* 
sembling moon beams, having got topsy-turvy, was lying like 
sleeping swans between the breasts of the damsels. And the 
lapis chains of some resembled water-crows ;* and the fine 
golden chains turned upside down of others appeared like ruddy 
geese. And those ladies resembled rivers having hips 
for banks; containing swans and K&randavas, and beautified 
with ruddy geese. And those sleeping females appeared 
like streams j having Kinkinis for their ripples ; and large 
gold lotusesf ; marks); of amorous encounter on their persons 
for ferocious aquatic animals; and perfections,^ for their 
banks. And on the tender frames, as well as on the tops 
of the breasts, of some graceful scratches consequent on 
pressure, appeared like ornaments. And the scarf-ends of 
some stirred by the air that was blowing about their faces, 
flapped on them again and again. And at the nether part 
of the faces of Rivana's wives, they (the scarf-ends)appeared 
beauteous like uplifted streamers of exceeding elegance, 
composed of many-hued golden yarn. And the ear-rings 
of some dames possessed of a pleasant sheen, stirred by 
the air that was breathing about their faces, were undulating 
gently. And the sweet breath of their faces, naturally 
fragrant, and redolent of sugar and dsava , was then regaling 
R&vana. And out of fear sprung from sleep and intoxication, 
some of R&vana’s wives were agaiu and again smelling the 
faces of those, co-wives with them, taking the faces to 
belong to R&vana. And from their hearts being firmly 
fixed on R&vana, those excellent women, having their sense 

* Kadamva — a drake ; or, according to some, a teal; a gander; or the 
species gallinula porphyrin. — T. 

f i e. the faces of the females are meant. Another meaning is, gold for large 
iotuscs. — T. 

| Vildsa may also mean arch displays by way of coquetry. — T. 

f Yasa, according to some, here means grace.— T. 





SUM DA RaKANDAM. 



VS 

of separateness removed, (albeit thus dealt with), did what 
was dear unto them. * And other females, making 
their gay scarf-ends (for their sheets), and making their 
arms, their pillows, were lying down there. And some were 
lying on others’ bosoms ;* and others again, on the arms of 
the latter. And some lay on the laps of others ; and 

others, again, on the breasts of the latter. And they reposed 
on each other’s thighs, flanks, waists, and backs ; and 
coming under the influence of wine and amour, they lay 
on each other’s persons. And those females having elegant 
waists, receiving pleasure from the contact with others’ 
persons, were sleeping there, with their hands fastened by 
each other. And that garland of females strung by the threads 
of their hands, appeared beauteous, like a real wreath strung 
on a thread, with maddened black bees (seated thereon). 
And that multitude of females in a medley appeared like au 
assemblage of blooming plants in the month of Chaitra,1 with 
its wreaths formed in consequence of their coming in contact 
with one another, and of its clusters touching each other, 
on account of the breeze blowing ; — with the plants encir- 
cling the graceful (necks of the trees), — and rife with 
Bhramaras chasing each other. — And although the ornaments 
of those women wearing ornaments, attires and wreaths, 
were put on proper places ; yet (on account of the profusion 
of the ornaments themselves, as well as because of the cir- 
cumstance of the dames’ sleeping), Jit was difficult to ascertain 
which ornament belonged to one damsel and which to another. 
And it seemed as if, Rivana having attained rest (through 

* The sense is very imperspicuous only by reason of the unskilful use of 
:lie pronouns. The damsels kissed did not resent the act ; but kissed the kissers 
n tum.—T. 

f March-April. 

X In consequence also, remarks the commentator, of the uniformity running 
trough the ornaments, as well as of the close contact of the persons of the 
idles. — T. 





RAMA FANA. 



$i6 

sleep), the (laming golden lamps furnished with various rajs, 
were gazing at the girls with winkless eyes. Daughters of 
Rajarshis, of Vipras, of Daityas, of Gandharbas. and of 
Rakshasas, having come under the influence of desire, had 
become his wives. And all those women had been procured 
by Ravana because he sought fight (with their relations) 
and some haughty dames, rapt with desire, had of themselves 
come to this place. And there was no woman there, who 
had been won by force by (RSvana), possessed as he was of 
prowess ; but they had all been subdued by his qualities. 
And save the surpassingly worthy daughter of Janaka, no 
female (had been brought), who had set her heart on another, 
or who had known any other before. And there was none 
who, being his wife, was not of high extraction ; none who 
was defective in grace ; none who was not of sterling merit ; 
none who was not decked out in ornaments and attire ; and 
none who was infirm ; and none who was not an object of 
desire of her lover. And the lord of monkeys endowed with 
uprightness of sense, thought, — “If the righteously wedded 
wife of Raghava were as one of the wives of the king of the 
Rakshasas, it would well for him.” Again reflected he,— 
“Sita is crowned with chastity and other virtues ; and the 
powerful lord of Lanka, assuming an illusory form, hath 
with much ado perpetrated this ignominious act.” 



SECTIION X. 



J^ND there Hanumin employed in looking around, saw 
a grand dais made of crystal ; and embellished with jewels; 
comparable to one belonging to the celestial regions; furnish- 
ed with superb and costly sofas, having their parts painted 
and composed of ivory, gold, and lapis lazulis ; with highly 
precious canopies. At one place thereof he saw a white 




SUNDARAK&NDAM. 



917 



umbrella, adorned with beautiful wreaths, resembling the 
lord of the stars himself. And Hanuman saw a splendid 
sofa garnished with gold, bearing garlands of agoka blos- 
soms, — flaming like fire ; around which persons kept waving 
with their hands chowris furnished with hair* ; rife with 
perfumes of various kinds ; odorous with rich dhupa } spread 
with excellent sheets ; covered with the skins of rams ; 
and decked on all sides with chaplets of gorgeous flowers. 
And that excellent and mighty monkey beheld therein the 
heroic sovereign of the RSkshasas, RSlvana, resembling a 
mass of clouds ; with flaming and brilliant ear-rings ; having 
reddened eyes ; of gigantic arms ; wearing a cloth composed 
of golden threads ; his person daubed with fragrant red 
sandal ; looking like a crimson cloud at eve fraught with 
lightning ; covered with noble ornaments ; endowed with 
eminent grace • capable of wearing forms at will ; resembling 
Mandara affluent with trees and woods and shrubs ; — sleeping, 
having given up sport at night ; adorned with elegant orna- 
ments ; dear unto the daughters of the R&kshasas, — the 
source of happiness unto Rakshasas ; — who had ceased from 
drinking, — asleep on a shining bedstead, — and respiring like a 
(Kissing) serpent.f And reaching there, Hanuman, waxing 
Wondrous agitated, shrank back, as if in fear. And then arriv- 
ing at the staircase, the mighty monkey, stationing himself on 
a dais in the middle of the stairs, gazed at the inebriate, 
Rlkshasa, resembling a tiger. And as the sovereign of the 
R&kshasas was sleeping, his graceful bed resembled a grand 
cascade, beside which stands an elephant breathing odour. 
And Hanum&n saw the arms of the huge-bodied lord 
cf RSkshasas, fastened with bracelets, — stretched (there),— 
like unto the banners of Indra ; which had been wounded 

f The commentator throws out a conjecture that artificial figures are here 
meant; which mechanically performed the function herein assigned to them. — T. 

f The commentator, however, interprets : like an elephant . Serpent is, I 
key, a happy rendering of niga. — T. 





9 1 8 



RlAllYANA. 



by the tusk-ends of Airavata, whose plump parts had been 
riven by vajra ; and which had been torn by the discus of 
Vishnu ; well developed ; having equal and elegant parts 
with hard joints ; fraught with strength ; with thumbs having 
nails bearing auspicious marks; having rings (on the fingers]; 
covered ; formed like bludgeons ; round ; resembling the trunks 
of elephants ; cast on the white bed like unto five-hooded 
serpents ; smeared and adorned with cool, fragrant, and 
excellent sandal resembling the blood of hares ; pressed 
by paragons ; odorous with incense ; resisting (in battle) 
Yakshas, and Pannagas, Gandharbas, gods and Dlnavas ; 
and the monkey saw his arms resting on the bed, like 
unto two beautiful and mighty serpents sleeping in the 
entrails of Mandara. And with both those well developed 
arms of his, the lord of RAkshasas resembling a bill, looked 
handsome like Mandara with its summits. And breath 
bearing the aroma of the mangoe, and the P*nniga % the 
sweet scent of the Vakula , the savour of viands fraught 
with the six kinds of tastes, and the perfume of wines, came 
out of the mighty mouth of the sovereign of the Rikshasas, 
filling, as it were, that entire chamber. And (Hanumin) be- 
held (Ravana), with his countenance, aglow with ear-rings 
and decked with a golden diadem embellished with pearis 
and jewels; daubed with red sandal; and adorned frith ; 
an elegant chain ; having a large, broad, and full-developed 
breast ; with a white silken cloth on, falling off his person; 
furnished with blood-red eyes ; covered with costly yellow 
sheets ; appearing like a mass of unrighteousness ; breathing 
like a serpent, or an elephant asleep in the mighty Gang! 
during the rains ; — four lamps set on the golden pQais 
illumining four sides ; even as lightnings display the enftilO 
surface of a mass of clouds. (And Hanum&n) also saw in 
the mansion of the Raksha chief, the wives of that huge- 
bodied "one dear unto his wives,— lying at his feet* Aod 
that protector of monkey-bands saw them, having coantes* 




SUN DA RAKlNDA M. 



919 



ances resembling the Moon displayed ; decked out with 
elegant ear-rings ; bearing unfading garlands* by way of 
ornamentation ; lying on the arms and lap of the lord of the 
Rakshas. And the monkey saw women bearing noble 
ornaments, — lying down. And he saw golden bracelets and 
ear-rings at the nether ends of the women's ears, — set with 
diamonds and lapises. And with their fair countenances 
resembling the Moon, graced with comely ear-rings, that 
terrace looked beautiful, like the w f elkin embellished with 
stars. The slender-waisted wives of the sovereign of the 
R&kshasas, overcome with languor consequent on drink and 
amorous encounter, were fast asleep at the very places where 
they were seated. And another transcendentally beautiful 
damsel possessed of lovely limbs, skilled in dance, was fast 
asleep, betraying comely movements (during sleep). And an- 
other was seen asleep, embracing a vind , — like a lotus with 
spreading petals, resting by the side of a raft. And another 
dark-eyed wench was asleep with her mudduka\ on her lap, 
like a loving mother having a boy. Another damsel possessed 
of graceful limbs and a shapely bust, was lying down, 
hugging her kettle-drum, — like a woman embracing her 
lover, obtained after a long time. And one lotus-eyed female 
was asleep, embracing her vind ; like an amorous damsel 
hugging her fair paramour. And another girl of res- 
trained self, given to dancing, had come under the sway 
of sleep, embracing her vipanchi\ like a female sleep- 
ing with her lover. And another having inebriate eyes, 
was fast asleep, embracing her mridanga with her 
charming, plump, and tender limbs, resembling gold. 
Another female of faultless features, endeued with a slender 
frame, having been overcome by lassitude consequent on 
drink, was asleep, with her panava on the ends of her lower 



* i\ e. celestial females. — T. 
f A kind of musical instrument. — T. 
J A kind of Vind . — T. 




9?o 



RklUlrANA. 



garment, held fast with her hands. Another woman was 
sleeping soundly, embracing her dindima * with another 
bound at her back ; like a female taking both her lover 
and her child. Another damsel having eyes resembling lotus- 
petals, having come under the influence of liquor, was asleep, 
firmly holding her aramvara + with her hands. Another 
woman, intoxicated by wine, was discovered asleep, with her 
water-vessel upset; and, in consequence, appearing like a well- 
washed variegated wreath in spring. Another, coming under 
the masterdom of slumber, was sleeping, holding with her 
hands her twin breasts resembling golden jars. And another 
lotus-eyed and moon-faccd fair one, coming under the govern- 
ance ol slumber, (was asleep), embracing another furnished 
with shapely hips. And eminently beautiful dames were 
asleep, embracing musical instruments ; like wenches press- 
ing lustful (lovers), with their breasts. And that monkey saw 
that lady, endeued with beauty, lying down apart in an 
excellent bed; adorned with ornaments containing pearls and 
jewels; and as if decorating that charming mansion with 
her grace. And the monkey saw there the yellow-hued 
Mandodari, having the splendour of gold; the object of 
(RSLvana’s) desire; beautiful exceedingly, — the mistress of the 
inner apartment, — lying down. And seeing (Mandodari) 
adorned with ornaments, the offspring of the Wind-god 
guessed, — ‘This one endowed with the wealth of youth and 
beauty might be Sit&.” And demonstrating great joy, that 
leader of monkey-bands rejoiced exceedingly. And thereat, 
(Hanum&n) struck at Ins arms with his hands, kissed his tail, 
exhibited signs of glee, frolicked, sang, darted towards the 
pillars, shot up to the top thereof, and jumped down to the 
earth, — manifesting his monkey-nature. 



* A kind of musical instrument. — T. 
f A kind of musical instrument. — T. 




SUMO A Ka KANDA M. 



V*I 

SECTION XI. 

- — 

Then resigning that line of thought,* that mighty 
monkey, regaining his equanimity, set out in another direc- 
tion of thought touching SitA. "Separated from Rama, that 
lady is incapabict of sleeping, or eating, or decorating 
(her person}, or drinking. And she is incapable of asso- 
ciating with any other person, although he were the 
sovereign Of the celestials himself. And even in all heaven 
there is none who is equal to Rama. She is some other.* 1 
Assuring himself of this, that foremost of monkeys, eager to 
behold Sitft, again began to range in that place set apart 
for drinking. Some were tired out with sporting; some with 
singing; some with dancing ; and some were fast asleep 
through intoxication. And some supported themselves on 
murajas , mridangas , or ckelikas ; and some women were 
sleeping on excellent sheets. And that leader of monkey- 
bands saw (that place of drinking) filled with thousands of 
women, adorned with ornaments engaged (in their sleep) 
in depicting each other's loveliness; and explaining the sense 
of songs; conversant with season and place; under- 
standing the meanings of words chiming in with season and 
place % l and skilful at play. And at other places aho he 
saw thousands of superb and youthful dames fast asleep,— 
employed in talking of each others beauty. And that leader 
of monkey bands saw (women) versed in season and place, 
and understanding the meanings of words consonant with 
season and place. And in the midst of them all, the lord of 
the R&kshasas looked splendid like an ox in a spacious stall 

* *.#. that Mandodari was Sit A. — T. 

f The text has na saptum arhati ; lit., it behoveth ( Sitd ) not to sltep. The 
sanse, however, is as ^iven above. — T. 

% All this, remarks RAmlnuja, appeared from their talk during sleep. — T. 

116 



R A A! Ay ANA. 



9 12 

in the midst of stately kine. And surrounded by them, llie 
Rakshasa chief appeared beautiful like a gig.intic elephant in 
a forest, surrounded by lemale elephants. And in the abode 
of the huge-bodied Rakshasa chief, that tiger-like monkey 
saw that place of drinking, furnished with every object of 
desire. And in that place set apart for drinking, be saw heap* 
of the flesh of buffaloes, deer, and boais, arranged separately. 
And that tiger-like monkey saw in capacious golden vessel* 
flesh of fowls and peacocks, which remained (after the repast). 
And llanum&n saw the flesh of boars, and I'ddhrinasas* 
Su/yas ) deer, and peacocks, seasoned with curds and Sauvar - 
chala ;+ and Knkalas,% and goats of various kinds.-flesh of hare 
half-fed, — Eka^alyas^wA buffaloes, — all chopped and dressed; 
and lickable and drinkable viands sharp and mild ; and edible* 
sharp and mild; and R&gahhandavas^ containing sugar and 
acid, capable of improving a vicious palate. And with large 
and costly stray bangles and bracelets ; and scattered cans,— 
and diverse kinds of fruit ; and wreaths of flowers, the pave- 
ment attained exceeding beauty. And with elegantly jointed 
bedsteads, arranged (around;, the scene of wassail appeared 
aflame without lire. And with meat consisting of many 
ingredients, fraught with diverse tastes, seasoned with many 
substances, and dressed by skilful cooks. — arranged separate- 
ly in the scene of revel ; and with noble and pleasant win - *, 
natural^and artificial , — asavas from sugar;and AI&dhvika$wA 
Asavas from flowers and frifts ; and impregnated separately 

* A species of birds, having, according to Vishnudharma , daik throaty 
red veins, and white wings. According to others, a kind of goats.— T. 

f A kind of salt. — T. 

t A kind of partriges. — T. 

$ A kind of fish. — 1*. 

J According to bomt, a prcp-irati-.n of the juice of grapes and pomegfts* 
ates, mixed with su^ar, etc. According to others, black cakes having ff 
kinds of relishes. — T. 

* Natural wines— such as Kddamvari etc., which require no preparation.— T. 

f From honey. According to some, from grapes. — T. 




SUXDARAKlNDAM. 



923 



with different kinds of fragrant dust, — the pavement, furnish- 
ed with innumerable garlands, surrounded with golden water* 
vessels and crystal bowls, and golden water-pots, looked 
exceedingly beautiful. And the monkey saw that foremost of 
all places set apart for drinking-, containing silvern and golden 
jars. And that mighty monkey saw golden wine-vessels 
studded with gems, all filled with wine ; and some with 
half full of liquor, some with their wine entirely exhausted.and 
some full of liquor. And (at some spots) he saw various 
kinds of viands, and at others wines ranged in rows, 
and at others the wine-vessels remaining half full. And 
there were many bedsteads belonging to fair ones, remaining 
vacant; and at some places excellent women were sleeping 
touching each other. And at one place, a female, borne 
down by the force of sleep, forcibly possessing herself of 
another’s cloth, and wrapping herstdf therewith, — went to the 
bed of that one, and was indulging in sleep. — And with their 
breath, their variegated wreaths and the cloth on their persons 
were stirring gently, as if with a mild-blovving breeze. 
And laden with the odours of cool sandal, and of sweet-tasting 
Sidhu ;* and of diverse wreaths and flowers, and with perfum- 
es of various kinds, — and entrancedf with (the aroma)of sandals 
suitable for use after ablution, and of dhupas y the air, im- 
pregnated with excellent scent, was there breathing around the 
car Pushpaka. And in the residence of the Raksha, there 
were some wenches sable, vet exceedingly witching; and 
some were dark-hucrl ; and the frames of some were of a 
golden brilliance. And their beauty, in consequence of their 
coming under the governance of sleep, and their being bereft 
of their senses by Madana, resembled that of lotuses in a 
sleep. Thus that highly energetic monkey saw everything 

* Spirit distilled from mollasses. — T. 

t Murchchhita — The commentator says, means spreading. I, however, 
here presume to go by my own light, feeble as that may be. Entranced will, 
I dare say, recommend itself to the poetical in especial. — T. 




9*4 



RlMA YANA. 



thoroughly in the inner apartment of Rftvana, — but fie saw 
not Janaka’s daughter. And seeing those females, that 
mighty monkey, apprehending loss of righteousness, was 
seized with an exceeding great fear*. “Beholding a female, 
who is the religiously wedded wife of another, while she m 
asleept, verily cau«eth loss of righteousness. My sight 
surely never seeketh others’ wives; but 1 have beheld thi* 
one that hath ravished another’s spouse.” And that in- 
telligent one, intent on attaining a knowledge of things 
c apable of being arrived at on grounds of judgment, again 
reflected effectively as to his course of action : “All these 
unsuspecting wives of Rftvana have been beheld by me; yet 
there are no signs that my mind hath undergone any altera- 
tion. In respect of the enlistment of the senses on behalf 
of any course of action good or evil, it is verily mind which 
is the cause ; and herein my mind is righteously disposed. 
And I could not search for Vaidehi elsewhere ; for in the 
matter of search, people always search for women even among 
women. And people search for creatures among the species 
to which they happen to belong : none searcheth for a lost 
lady among female deer. Therefore have I with a pure 
heart explored the entire inner apartment of Rftvana; hot 
Janaka’s daughter I see not.” And Hanumftn endowed with 
prowess saw the daughters of gods, and Gandharbas, and 
K ft gas; hut he saw not Janaki. And not seeing her, that 
hero, having heheld other magnificent dames, coming out of 
that place, set about searching for Sitft (afresh). And leaving 
the place of wassail, the graceful offspring of the Wind*god t 
taking extreme care, again began to search for Sitft all about , 
(another quarter). I 

* R-membering. say* the commentator, the injunction of tb«MriptnU 
“None *>houM see a nude female." — T. 

f A ltd therefor* presumably incapable of taking care of herself. — 7*. i 




SUN DA It A KlVDAM 



9 ** 



SECTION XII. 



J^lND remaining in that mansion, (Hnnum&n) desirous of 
getting a sight of Sita graced with a fair presence, went 
into bowers, and picture galleries, and night-houses ;* but 
her he did not find. And not finding the beloved (spouse) 
of Raghu’s son, that mighty monkey reflected, — “Surely Sita 
is not alive, — for although I have searched (through and 
through), yet Mithil§’s daughter I have failed to find. And 
that girl solicitous for the preservation of her chastity, and 
staying in the prime path of virtuous woman, — that chaste 
one — hath, for certain, been slain by this chief of the 
R&kshasas, (ever) finding delight in iniquity. And seeing 
the wives of the R&kshasa monarch, — of frightful forms,— 
monstrous; of lurid hue ; having huge faces ; with large horrid 
eyes, — the daughter of Janaka hath given up the ghost 
from fright. Failing to see Sita, and (thereby) annuling 
my prowess, and having long spent the appointed space 
in company with the monkeys, way have I none to present 
myself before Sugriva, that monkey being puissant and 
given to meting out sharp chastisement. Having searched 
the inner apartment through, and seen the wives of the 
R£kshasa, I do not see the chaste Sita. Therefore vain is 
the trouble that I take. What, alas ! shall the monkeys 
assembled tell me when I shall go (to them) ? ‘O hero, tell 
us what thou hast done, repairing there. , And not having 
seen Janaka's daughter, what shall I answer ? The term 
fixed (by Sugriva) having been past, certainly meet it is that 
I should fast to death. And what shall the aged Jambhavan, 
and what shall Angada, say ? And what, again, shall the 
assembled monkeys say to me when I shall h ive crossed over 
the main ? But porseverence is the source of good fortune ; 

* Intended for stay at night. — T. 





926 



RXmX van*. 



and perscverence bringcth about supreme happiness. Search 
again I will, where I have not yet searched. Perseverence, 
for certain, ever bringeth people to all profitable objects. 
Whatever one doeth with vigor, beareth fruit. Therefore will 
I put forth fresh dear efforts vigorously. 1 will search such 
places held by RAvana as I have not yet seen. I have 
again searched the picture-galleries and the sporting-struc- 
tures, and edifices, and roads passing through gardens, as 
well as the cars.” Having thought thus, HanumAn again set 
about searching the subterranean abodes, religious buildings, 
and manv-storied mansions. And flying up, and coming 
down, and staying, and going at places, and opening doors, 
and shutting others, and entering and issuing out, and 
falling down as if darting up, that mighty monkey began to 
range on all sides. There was not even space measuring 
four fingers in that inner apartment of RAvana, to which the 
monkey did not repair. And he saw the abodes of the 
nobility, the daises, the trees by the crossings, the holes, and 
the tanks. And HanumAn saw there RAkshasas of various 
forms, frightful and deformed ; but lie saw not Janaka's 
daughter. And Hanuman saw there the wives of VidyA- 
dharas ; but he saw not Raghava’s beloved. And HanuvnAn 
saw there trnnscendentally beautiful women— daughters of 
NAgas — having countenances resembling the moon ; but he 
saw not J.maka’s daughter. And HanumAn saw there 
daughters of Xagas forcibly brought by the lord of the 
RAkshasas ; but he saw not Janaka’s daughter. Having seen 
other beauteous females, and not seeing her, the mighty- 
armed son of the Wind-god was oppressed with sadness. 
Seeing that the endeavours of the monarch of monkeys, as 
well as the bounding over the main, had come to nought, the 
offspring of the Wind-god was plunged in thought. Descend- 
ing from the aerial car. HanumAn, son unto the Wind-god, his 
scutes dr-piivcd by sorrow, was again wrought up with 
anx'ety. 




SUNDA RA KIND. I M. 



9*7 



SECTION XIII . 

j^LLIGHTING from the car, Hatium&n possessed of vigorous 
activity, — leader of monkey-bands — nearing the wall, looked 
like lightning within a mass of clouds.* And having gone 
round the mansions of R&vana, and not seeing Janaki, the 
monkey Hanum&n said, — “Striving after Rama’s welfare, 
1 have again searched through LankS, ; but I do not see 
Videha’s daughter, Janaki, having all her limbs endeued with 
loveliness. And I have explored pools, and watery expanses, 
and tanks, and rivers, and streams, and marshes, and woods, 
and citadels, and mountains, yea, — all this earth ; but Janaki 
I do not find. The vulture-king Sampati had told that SitSL 
was in the mansion of Ravana. But why do I not see her 
(here) ? Or doth Maithili Sita, daughter unto Janaka.t sprung 
in the Videha line, forcibly carried off (by Ravana\ and 
completely in his power, abide by the mandate (of that 
monarch) ? I conceive that while taking Sit5, the Raksha 
darted upward, he being influenced by fear of Rama’s shafts ; 
(and accordingly losing control over his movements), she fell 
off by the way. Or I fancy that while that noble lady was 
being carried away along the way ranged by Siddlns, she 
lost her life on beholding the ocean. Or I think that on 
account of the vehement speed assumed by Ravana, and also 
oppressed with his arms, that large-eyed noble lady hath been 
bereft of her life. For certain, while (Ravana) was soaring 
higher and higher, Janaka's daughter, rolling (on the car), 
dropped down into the sea. Alas ! trying to preserve her 
chTstity. the forlorn Sit§, practising self-mortification, hath 
bc*en devoured by this abject-minded RSvana. Or that dark- 

* The commentator remarks : By this the author ^insinuates that the wall 
was of entire sapphire. — T. 

f Knowing Brahma , remarks Rlmlnuja. — T 





923 



RlMlrANA. 



eyed innocent one, liatli been eaten up by the wives of the 
R&kshasa chief, actuated by wicked motives * (Ever) contem- 
plating . Rama’s countenance, resembling the full Moon, with 
eyes like lotus-leaves, she, exercised with sorrow, hath 
breathed her last. Bewailing much with exclamations of 
‘Oh Rama and Lakshmana !’ *Ah Ayodlnl !* that lady 
Vaidehi hath renounced her body. Or secretly kept in 
Ravana’s mansion, that girl, like a female parrot in a cage, 
is weeping bitterly. How can the slender-waisted wife of 
R&ma, born in the race of Janaka, furnished with eyes resem- 
bling lotus petals, come under the sway of R&vana ? I shall 
not be able to say of Rama’s beloved wife that she hath been 
sullied, t or that I have seen her, or yet that she is dead. 
To say this is censurable ; not to say it is also such. 
What is my course ? I find myself in a false position. Things 
having drifted to this pass, what should I say, now that the 
time hath come ? 9 Thus thinking, HanumSn again reflect- 
ed, — “If without seeing Sita, I repair to the abode of the 
lord of monkeys, what then shall I gain as the object of my 
exertions ? This my bounding over the main comes to 
nought; as also my entry into Lanka and the sight of the 
R&kshasas. And wliat shall Sugriva say ? Or the assembled 
monkeys ; or those twin sous of Dafaratha ; to me when 
I shall have come to Kishkindha ? And if going there, I 
should say a harsh speech unto K&kutstha— *1 have not seen 
Sita’ — he shall renounce his life. Hearing harsh, terrible, 
unsufTcrable, fierce and foul words concerning Sita, calculated 
to set the senses on fire, he shall not exist. And seeing him 
come under misery, with his inind expiring, the intelligent 
Lakshmana, firmly attached (unto Rama), shall also cease to 
exist. And hearing that his two brothers are dead, Bharata 
also shall give up existence. And seeing Bharata dead, 

• Jealousy, according to the commentator.— T. 

t This is evidently the sense, having regard to the preceding rlsAe, ahhoq^ 
the commentator gives the apparent meaning of vinastha perished.— T. 



SVA DA RA KIND A M 



w 

Satrughna shall also renounce his life. And beholding their 
sons dead, their mothers, Kau^alySL, Sumitrl and Kaikayi, 
shall, certainly, resign their lives. And seeing Rama in that 
plight, the lord of the monkeys, Sugriva, grateful and having 
liis heart fast fixed in truth, shall give up his life. And Uml, 
aggrieved, heart-wrung, distressed and bereft of happiness, 
and assuming the garb of a female ascetic, because of grief 
for her husband, shall resign her existence. And oppressed 
with grief arising from V&li, and weighed down by sorrow, 
the queen T&r&, also, resolving on death shall cease to exist. 
And in consequence of the death of his father and mother 
and the calamity befalling Sugriva, the prince Angada also 
shall next forego his existence. And the dwellers of the 
woods overwhelmed with grief got of (the decease of) their 
master, shall strike at their heads with their clenched fists 
and hands. And the monkeys affectionately cherished by 
the famous lord of the monkeys with soothing words gifts 
and regard, shall resign there lives. And no more in woods, 
and rocks, or secret spots, shall the foremost monkeys, 
assembled together, indulge in sports. And they, along with 
their sons and wives, and counsellors, distressed on account 
the disaster that hath overtaken their master, — shall fall 
from the tops of mountains down to places even or uneven. 
And the monkeys shall take poison, or hang themselves, or 
enter into flaming fire, or fast, or fall on their own weapons. 
I fancy that a loud wailing shall arise on my return (to that 
place) ; and the race of Ikshwaku as well as the rangers of 
the woods shall meet with destruction. Therefore I will not 
repair hence to the city of KishkindhS. ; nor can 1 see Sugriva 
without Mithil&’s daughter. On my not going there and stay- 
ing here, those rigliteous-souled Maharathas as well as the fast- 
fleeting monkeys, shall preserve their lives through hope 
(of hearing tidings concerning Sita.) And not having seen 
Janaka’s daughter, I will lead the Vdnaprastha mode of life, 
partaking (of fruits) falling into my hands or mouth, restrain- 




930 



RlMlYANA . 



ing my senses, and staying at the foot of trees. Preparing 
a funereal pile on a tract bordering on the sea, abounding 
in fruits, and flowers, and water, I will enter into flaming 
fire. And as I sit to fast, and for effecting the separation of 
self from my body and centering my identity in the spirit 
crows and beasts of prey shall feed on my body. And 
I think the sages have enjoyed another way of exit. I 
shall, failing to see Jinaki, enter into water. My illustrious 
and exalted garland of fame, begot of excellent acts, hath 
perished for good in consequence of my not seeing Siti* 
Or restraining myself, I shall become an ascetic living under- 
neath trees ; but return I will not, without obtaining a sight 
of that dark-eyed damsel. If I return without seeing Siti, all 
the monkeys with Angada shall cease to exist. Incalculable 
are the ills of my putting a period to my existence ; (on the 
other hand) if I live, I may come by good. Therefore my 
life I will maintain. If I live, it may conduce to happiness." 
Having thus indulged in a variety of harassing thoughts in 
his mind,that foremost of monkeys could not cross over to the 
other shore (of the sea of distress). Then summoning energy f 
that elephantine monkey endeued with fortitude reflected, — 
“Or I shall slay the Ten-necked R&vana possessed of great 
strength. Sit& hath been carried off ; but by this I shall avenge 
myself. Or throwing him repeatedly into the sea, I (shall take 
him) and present him to Rima, even as one presents a beast 
unto Pa9upat.”t Reflecting thus, the monkey, not finding Sitft. 
— agitated with sorrow and anxiety, thought,—' “So long as I 
do not find the illustrious spouse of R&ma, Siti, I will explore 
the city of Lanki again and again. If in consonance with 
Samp&t's speech, I bring R&ma hither, Righava, not seeing 

• Tirtha reads chirardtriyam for chirar&trya. Then the mdn is. TVs 
illustrious live-long fair-rooted and auspicious night crowned with a garland d 
fame, hath borne no fruit, in consequence of my not seeing Siti. Thscown* 
tator, I presume, refines a little too much.— T. 

t An appellation of Siva — lit. lord 0/ beasts — in allusion to fcacrilHI 

to Siva. — T. 




SUN DA RA KlNDAM . 



95 * 

his wife, shall burn all the monkeys. (Therefore) even here 
I shall stay, restraining my fare and mortifying my senses. 
All those principal monkeys ought not to lose their lives 
because of any act to which I may commit myself. This is 
the asoka wood, extensive and containing mighty trees. 
This I shall explore, as it hath not yet been searched by 
me. And saluting the Vasus, the Rudras, the Adityas, the 
twin Aywins, ( and R&ma and Lakshmana), I enhancing 
the sorrow of the Rakhas, shall go into it. Having vanquished 
the RSkshas, I will bestow on R&ma the lady of the Ikshw&kur' 
race like the fruit of asceticism conferred on an ascetic.” 
Having thus reflected for a space, the mighty-armed 
offspring of the Wind-god, his senses agitated with anxiety, 
arose. “I bow unto Rama with Lakshmana, and unto the 
revered daughter of Janaka, I bow unto Rudra, and Indra, 
and Yama, and Wind-god, and I bow unto the Moon, unto 
Fire and unto the Maruts.” Having bowed unto them all, 
as also unto Sugriva, the offspring of the Wind-god, survey- 
ing all the cardinal points, mentally entered the Asoka wood. 
Having mentally entered the Asoka wood, that monkey, son 
unto the Wind-god, reflected as to what he should do next. 
The sacred Asoka wood, sanctified with every purifying rite 
and abounding in woods, needs must be full of Rakshas. 
And warders, directed there to, forsooth, protect the trees ; 
and that worshipful Soul of the universe* does not breathe 
here vigorously. I contract my person in the interests of 
Rama, and in order that Rivana may not see me. May 
all the deities along with the saints confer success on me. 
And may the revered self-create Brahma, and the deities, 
and the ascetics, and Fire, and wind, and the much invoked 
bearer of the Vajra, + and the noose-handed Varuna, and 
the Moon and the Sun, the high-souled A9winis, and all the 
Maruts — (confer) success (on me) ! And all beings, and the 

* The wind. — T. 

+ Indra.— T. 






93 * 



RlMlrANA. 



lord of them all,* and others that, albeit not specified in the 
scriptures, are yet visible in the way, — will confer success 
on me. When shall 1 behold the blameless face of that noble 
lady, — with its protruding nose; having luminous smiles, 
having eyes resembling lotus-petals ; and bright as the 
complacent lord of stars ? Ah ! to-day how shall feeble forlorn 
one that hath been borne down by the force of the mean, 
abject and grim-visaged (RSvana\ fierce yet wearing (at the 
time of the rape), a dress tending to inspire confidence, — 
come in my sight ?" 



SECTION XIV. 



Having reflected for a while, and mentally met with 
her, that highly energetic one leapt from the wall of 
Havana’s mansion on to that (of the Asoka wood). And 
all his frame filled with delight, that mighty monkey, station- 
ed on the wall, saw various trees having their tops furnished 
with flowers through spring and the other seasons, — salts 
and a so k as, bhavyas, champakas, udalakas y and nSgas, and 
those bearing fruits resembling the mouths of monkeys; 
and those relative to mango woods. — with hundreds of plants. 
Ami (Jianun.an) leapt into the garden like an arrow let go 
from the bow string. Entering into the grove, variegated 
ail over • resonant with the notes of birds ; filled on all sides 
with golden and silvern trees; many-hued with birds and 
beasts ; containing dainty tracts of trees like unto the risen 
Sun, — the powerful Hanmnan saw the place surrounded with 
various kinds of trees having fruits and flowers ; frequented 
by maddened coel> and bhramaras , with creatures expressing 
happiness by their movements, birds and beasts overflowing 



Pravap.ui — T. 




SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



933 



with spirits ; echoing with the cries of peacocks ; furnished 
with various species of fowls. And as he was searching for 
that surpassingly beautiful and blameless daughter of the king, 
that monkey awakened the monkeys that were sleeping 
sweetly. And blown against by the wind caused by the wings 
of the birds as they flew upwards, various and variegated 
trees showered down blossoms. And in the midst of the 
Asoka wood, HanumSLn, son unto the Wind-god, covered over 
with flowers, looked lovely like a hill strewn with blossoms. 
And all creatures, beholding that monkey embosomed among 
trees and darting on all sides, took him for spring. And 
strewn with several masses of blossoms loosened from the 
trees, the Earth appeared beauteous like a damsel dight with 
ornaments. And shaken in diverse ways by the motion of 
the light fleeting monkey, the trees showered many-hued 
flowers. And with their leaves and tops torn, and their flowers 
and fruits shrivelled up, the trees looked like worsted gamb- 
lers bereft of their clothes. And shaken by Hanum&n 
vehemently moving about, those excellent trees crowned with 
fruits, speedily cast off fruits, flowers and foliage. And 
moved by the Wind god's offspring, the trees with their trunks 
left, and forsaken by the fowls were incapable of harbouring 
any creatures. And like youthful fair ones with hair dis- 
hevelled, their paste worn off, their upper lips with fair teeth 
sucked of their moisture; and having their persons torn with 
nails and teeth ; appeared the Asoka wood with its trees 
shattered ; and itself ground with the tail, hands and legs (of 
Hanumin). And that monkey with his vehemence scattered 
the clusters of shrubs, like the wind violently scattering 
clouds in the rainy season. And ranging there, the monkey 
saw beautiful pavements, jewelled, silvern aud golden. And 
he saw there various pools filled with excellent water and 
having steps crusted with jewels. Their sandy soil was 
filled with pearls and corals, and the ground inside was made 
of crystal. And their banks were decked witjidiverse golden 




934 



rXmIvaNa. 



trees. They were beautified with full blown lotuses, water* 
lilies, Chakravakas and Natyuhas * and filled with the notes 
of swans and Sdrasas. They were encircled on all sides 
with big tanks having trees on their banks and water, clear 
and sweet like unto nectar. They were entwined with 
hundreds of creepers, covered with Santdnaf flowers and filled 
with diverse groves and Karaviras serving the purpose of 
windows. { And thereupon that foremost of monkeys beheld 
there a mountain — the most picturesque in the world, resem- 
bling clouds, having high summits, covered on all sides with 
peaks and filled with hilly abodes and various trees. And that 
monkey beheld there a river falling down from the mountain 
like unto a damsel falling down from the lap of her beloved. 
And the branches of the trees touching the water (of the 
stream) resembled a fair damsel prevented by her dear com- 
panions from forsaking the company of her beloved). And 
that great monkey beheld further down the stream turning 
back like unto the damsel, pleased, going back to her dear 
one. And that foremost of monkeys, Hanum&n, the son of 
MSruti, beheld, at some distance, ponds filled with lotuses 
and various birds. And he saw a big artificial pond full of 
cool water having stairs crusted with excellent jewels and its 
sandy ba-nks filled with pearls. It was embellished (on all 
sides) with various animals, diverse trees and big mansions 
made by Viswakarma§ himself. It was adorned all around 
with artificial fqrests and all the trees there bore flowers and 
fruits, spreading their branches like unto umbrellas and 
having golden and silvern pavements under them. And that 
great monkey beheld there one golden Singsapa || tree 

• A gallinule. — T. 

+ One of the trees of heaven. — T. 

X Literally the passages means “ making a gap in that forest thickly fiM 
with trees.' ’ But Ramanuja interprets thus and we have adopted his iatUfM 
tat ion. — T. 

4 The son of BrahmA and artist of gods.— T. 

A tree (Dalbergia Sisu). — T. 



SUN DA RA KIND A M. 



935 



surrounded on all sides with golden pavements. And'he 
saw the glebe, the hill streams and many a golden tree 
resembling fire. By the lustre of all those trees that heroic 
monkey appeared as if made of gold like unto the Sun 
by the touch of the mount Sumeru. And having seen those 
beautiful golden trees, shaken by the wind and making a 
sound like that of a Kinkini ;* having flowery tops and new 
leaves he was greatly amazed. And climbing that Singsapa 
tree enveloped with leaves that monkey, gifted with velocity, 
reflected — “Perchance I may see Vaidehi, exercised with 
grief, anxious to behold R&ma and wandering hither and 
thither at her pleasure. Certainly this is the picturesque 
Asoka forest of that vicious-souled one, embellished with 
sandal, Champakas and Vakulas. Here is a beautiful pond 
abounding in lotuses, thronged with birds and forsooth shall 
that royal spouse J&naki repair hither. She is the beloved 
queen of Righava and expert in walking in the garden. And 
separated from R&ma, certainly shall j£naki repair hither. 
Or she having the eyes of a young antelope and adept in 
roaming in the forest, exercised with thought touching Rama, 
shall come here. Or she having beautiful eyes and fond of 
ranging in the forest, racked with sorrow in consequence of 
R&ma’s separation, doth always frequent this forest.f Ere 
this, the chaste and worshipful spouse of R&ma — Janaka’s 
daughter, used to love always the birds and animals of the 
forest. (The morning hath set in) and surely the beautiful 
and graceful daughter of Janaka fond of performing morningj 
ablutions, shall come to this river of pure water to perform 
them. Truly is this beautiful forest of Asoka the worthy 

• A kind of tinkling ornament. — T. 

f The commentator, Ramanuja interprets this sloka as explaining the cause 
of Si&t's frequentiug the Asoka forest. — T. 

t Sandhya literally means the point of time which connects day and night. 
It however, generally means the period after sunset and before the night sets 
in. But here with reference to the speech which Hanum&n began by the end 
of night, it means the morning. — T. 





ft* Ml van a. 



abode of the beloved and chaste spouse of Rflma, the lord 
of men. If that one of moon-like countenance breathes, 
forsooth shall she come to this river of cool water.” Having 
arrived there and anxiously expecting the appearance of the 
spouse of that lord of men, the high-souled HanumSn hiding 
himself (on the Singsapa tree) enveloped with flowers and 
leaves, beheld all. 



SECTION XV. 

0:0 

Having stationed himself on the tree, casting his 
looks all around in quest of SitSL and looking down on the 
earth he surveyed the entire forest of ( Asoka ). It was beauti- 
fied with Sanidnaka creepers and various trees, fragrant 
with celestial odours and was embellished on all sides. It 
resembled Nandana or the celestial garden, and was filled 
with various animals and birds, palaces and mansions; 
resounded with the notes of Kokilas ; adorned with the ponds 
abounding in silvern water-lillies and lotuses; filled with 
many seats and coverlets and various houses having spacious 
courtyards; adorned with beautiful flowers of all seasons and 
trees bearing fruits. And the beauty of the blossoming 
Asokas resembled the effulgence of the Sun. And stationed 
there M£ruti beheld trees as if devoid of leaves on account 
of the hundreds of birds, adorned with various flowers, 
resorting there. And he saw there the earth touched by 
Asoka trees, the removers of grief, having flowers growing 
from the roots and lowered down with their weight. And 
the entire quarter was as if ablaze with the beauty of the 
flowery Karnikaras and Ktngsukas. And there appeared in 
beauty many flowery Punnagas % Saptaparnas % Champmkmx % 
and Udalakas having deeply expanded roots. And there 
was a thousand of Asoka trees, some of whom were like 




SUN DA RA KlNDAM . 



937 



gold, some were like the flame of fire and some were like 
dark-blue collyrium. It was like the garden of Nandana or 
like that of Kuvera or perhaps it surpassed the both in excel- 
lence. And enveloped in charming, celestial grace beyond 
conception and having flowers for stars that forest appeared 
like a second sky. Aud covered with hundreds of pearl-like 
flowers the forest looked like the fifth ocean. And that 
garden was embellished with flowers of all seasons and honey- . 
smelling trees, and filled with diverse notes and various 
animals and birds. And that fragrant garden was rendered 
more charming with various other fragrances. And that 
foremost of monkeys beheld in that garden of Asoka, a round 
palace, situated at a distance, fragrant as the Gandhamddana 
mountain and high as the lord of mountains. (The 

palace) was white as the Kaila$a hill and built on 

thousand pillars. All its stairs were made of coral 

and its pavements made of burning gold. Its beauty 
was as if burning all along and stealing the vision of the 
lookers-on. It was spotless and on account of its height 
touched the welkin. And thereupon he beheld there (Sit&) 

wearing a soiled cloth, poorly, greatly reduced by fast, sigh- 
ing again and again and encircled by a band of Rakshasees. 
She was (however) spotless like unto the rays of the moon 
on the first lunar day. And her graceful beauty could with 
great difficulty be perceived like unto the flame of fire 
enveloped with smoke. And wearing a shattered and soiled 
yellow cloth and divested of all ornaments she appeared like 
a lotus stalk without lotuses.* Oppressed, racked with grief, 
weakened and chaste as she was, she appeared like Rohini 
possessed by Ketu. She was greatly reduced by fast, 
stricken with grief and anxious thoughts, disturbed with 
sorrow and was poorly and her eyes were always full of tears. 

• This passage has another meaning — Padminx has two meanings — 
(i) lotus (a) Lakskmi or the goddess of wealth. The goddess of wealth is 
generally described as sitting on a lotus. — T. 

1 1 8 



t&MlrANA. 



S>3 8 

Separated from her kith and kin and not beholding RJhna and 
Lakshmana* but the Rakshasees, she appeared like a hind 
surrounded by dogs. Her braid of long hair resembling a 
black serpent falling on her back it appeared as if the Eartli 
was filled with dark-blue forests on the disappearance of the 
rains. She was worthy of happiness only and never knew 
of misery and therefore she was (now) greatly oppressed with 
sorrow. And beholding that one of expansive eyes rendered 
pale and feeble, Hanuman, by various conclusive arguments 
reflected within himself “She must be Siti, for this damsel 
looks just like her, whom I saw, when she was ravished by 
R&vana, assuming shapes at will. Having the countenance 
of the full-inoon, beautiful eye brows, round breast, she is as 
if dispelling the darkness from all quarters by virtue of 
her grace. Her throat was yellow, and her lips were like 
Bivibas . t She was of middle stature and her limbs were all 
well built. She had eyes resembling lotus petals and was 
like the beloved wife of Manmatha — Rati and was adorable 
unto the whole creation like the rays of the fulbmoon. That 
one having a graceful person was seated on the earth like a 
female ascetic having her senses restrained. And she was 
sighing again and again like the timid daughter-in-law of 
the lord of serpents. J Entangled by a mighty web of grief 
her grace was greatly lessened and she appeared like the 
flame of fire enveloped in smoke. She was like unto Smriti 
of doubtful meanings, fallen wealth, lost respect, hope with- 
out any desire for gain, A7<//;/§ of many troubles, sullied 
understanding and fame soiled with false rumours. That 
innocent one was greatly distressed for not being able to 

* Priytljanam — literally nu.ins dear onus — but here it refers to R4ma uf 
Lakshinana. — T. 

f A cicurbituceous plant with red fruits. — T. 

t The epithet has a special significance because through her the dr itiltWm 
of the race of Rakshasas was brought about. — T. 

S Yoga or asceticism by virtue of which final emancipation from existent* 
is effected. — T. 




SUNDA RA RAN DA M. 



939 



attend upon Rama, and she having the eyes of a young hind, 
being oppressed by the RSLkshasees was casting her looks 
hither and thither. And with a displeased countenance, hav- 
ing dark-blue and curling eye lashes, and eyes full of tears, she 
was sighing again and again. Worthy of wearing ornamesnt 
but now without any, poorly, crusted with execrations, she 
appeared like the rays of the stars enveloped by dark-blue 
clouds. And beholding Sitfi in that pitiable plight like unto 
learning for want of practice, (Hanum&n) was puzzled with 
doubts. And seeing her without ornaments he could with 
great difficulty make her out like unto words having different 
meanings without the knowledge of grammar. And behold- 
ing that blameless daughter of the king, having expansive 
eyes, Hanumln, by various reasonings, reflected — “Forsooth 
she must be Sita. I see at her person all these ornaments, 
of which Rama mentioned unto me at the time of my depar- 
ture. I behold on her ears excellent ear-rings and nicely 
placed Svadangstras * and on her arms jewelled ornaments 
rendered dark-blue by dirt for constant use. Verily these 
are the ornaments RSma mentioned unto me. I do not 
perceive them which had been cast off by her. But these are 
the rest there is not the least doubt about it. The monkeys 
had seen, her excellent yellow cloth made of golden fibres, 
on the hill. They had seen also her excellent ornaments, 
which cast off by her, fell on the earth with a sound. Her 
cloth hath been shattered by constant use but her grace hath 
not been rendered worse than its color. This one having a 
golden countenance must be the beloved queen of Rama, who, 
albeit separated from him, hath not disappeared from his mind. 
This is that damsel on whose account Rama being simultane- 
ously burnt by affection, pity, grief and amour, — affection in 
consequence of his beloved spouse being ravished, pity for 
his inability to protect one dependent on him, grief for the 
loss of his beloved wife and amour for his dear one. Verily 



• A kind of ornament worn on the ears. — T. 




940 



RlMlYANA. 



it appeareth from the grace of her person, from her well 
developed limbs and from RSma’s beauty that this worshipful 
damsel having dark-blue eyes must be his spouse. She has 
her mind fixed in him, and he in her and it is for this that 
she and the virtuous-souled (R2Lma) have been still main- 
taining their being. Indeed my master R&ma hath performed 
a mighty task for breathes he still in her separation, without 
consuming himself in grief.” And having beheld Sita in 
this plight, that son of the Wind-god approached R&ma in 
mind and showered praises on his master. 



SECTION XVI. 



_A_ND having eulogized SitS, worthy of being praised and 
R2ma, endeared by accomplishments that foremost of mon- 
keys again engaged in meditation. And having reflected 
for some time, the powerful HanumSn, having his eyes full 
of tears bewailed on Sita’s account (in the following strain) 
— “No one can withstand the course of destiny since Sill, 
being the spouse of the worshipful brother of Lakshmana, 
ever obedient unto his elders, hath been overwhelmed 
with grief. The worshipful damsel is cognizant of the 
prowess of Rama and the intelligent Lakshmana and for 
this she is not entirely depressed like unto the riref 
Ganges at the approach of the rainy season. As regards 
their character, age, conduct, family and other auspicious 
marks they are equal and hence RSgh.iva deserveth Vatdehi 
and this one of dark-blue eyes is his.” And having seen her, 
goid-hued and conducing to the happiness of the people 
like unto the Goddess of wealth, Hanum&n approached 
Rama in his mind and said : — “For this (damsel) was killed 
the mighty Vali and Kavanda — RSvana's equal in prowess. 
For her too) was destroyed in battle, the terribly powerful 




SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



94t 



R&kshasa — Viradha,by RIma, putting forth his energy, like unto 
Shambara killed by Mahendra. (It was for her) that fourteen 
thousand R5kshasas of terrible deeds were destroyed at 
Janasthana with arrows resembling the flame of fire. And 
Khara was killed in battle, and Trishari was discomfitted and 
the mighty Dushana by R5ma, knowing his ownself. And it 
was on her account that Sugriva, known all over the world, 
came by the wealth of the monkeys hard to acquire and 
amassed by V5li. And it is for this (damsel) of expansive 
eyes that I have crossed the effulgent lord of rivers and have 
seen this city. And methinks it would have been all proper 
had R§ma turned on her account the whole earth bounded 
by oceans. If the kingdom over the three worlds and the 
daughter of Janaka be compared together, the former is not 
equal to one hundredth part of Sita. This Sit5, the daughter 
of the high-souled Janaka, the pious King of MithilS, firmly 
attached unto her husband, rose, covered with dust, out of 
the earth, in a field delved by a furrow. She is the well- 
known eldest daughter-in-law of the king Da^aratha, of 
an adorable character and unchecked prowess. And She is 
the beloved spouse of the pious and grateful Rama, know- 
ing his ownself, and has been brought under the control of the 
Rdkshasees. Renouncing all luxuries, and considering not 
the least about miseries, she actuated by her husband's love 
entered the solitary forest. And satisfied with fruits and roots 
and ever engaged in her husband's service, she lived in the 
forest as much delighted as she was in her house. And 
that one of a golden hue, never used to afflictions and who 
was wont to converse always with a delighted countenance, 
hath now been suffering incomparable miseries. Like unto 
a thirsty wight longing for an abode where he might get 
a drink, RSghava panteth after seeing her, gifted with an 
exalted character and oppressed by Ravana. As a monarch 
who had lost his kingdom, is greatly delighted when he 
regaineth it, forsooth shall R&ghava, in like manner, 




94 * 



RAA/IFaNJ. 



be pleased when he shall come by her. She too hath been 
maintaining her being in the hope of seeing R3ma again, 
separated as she is from her friends and deprived of all 
comforts and luxuries. These Rdkshasees , and these trees 
enveloped with fruits and flowers — forsooth she doth not 
behold, but is engaged with all her heart in mediations 
only touching Rama. Husband enhanceth the beauty of 
a female more than the dress (and therefore Sill) beautiful 
as she is, doth not appear graceful, in her husband’s absence. 
Forsooth my master RSma hath performed a difficult art for 
he hath been still keeping up his life iu her separation 
without consuming himself in grief. My heart is greatly 
pained knowing that she, having dark-blue eyes, resembling 
lotus petals, worthy of happiness, hath been possessed by 
grief. She, patient as the Earth, having eyes resembling 
lotuses, who was ere this protected by RSghava and 
Lakshmann, is now being guarded by R&kshasees having 
terrible eyes, under the trees. Being harassed with continued 
miseries, the daughter of Janaka hath lost all her beauty 
like unto a water-lily crushed with frost, and hath come by 
a miserable plight like unto a doe seperated from her mate. 
The branches of the Asoka trees, lowered down with flowers 
are as if enhancing her grief as also the Moon of many 
thousand rays, at the expiry of the winter. 91 Having reflec- 
ted thus and arrived at the conclusion that she was Sill* 
that powerful leader of monkeys gifted with velocity stationed 
himself on that tree. 




SU.XDA RA KliXDA M. 



943 



SECTION XVII. 



GCherEUPON the Moon, white as water-lily and of clear 
appearance proceeded far down the welkin like unto a 
goose traversing the blue wate’rs. With a view to befriend 
him, the Moon of clear rays, sprinkled the Wind-God’s son, 
with cool beams. And thereupon he beheld Sila, having a 
moon-like countenance, plunged in grief like unto a laden 
boat sunk in water. While beholding Vaidehi,Hanuman,the son 
of Maruta, observed at some distance, a number of grim-visaged 
Rlkshasees. Some had one ear, some one eye, some had big 
ears some was without ears ; some had formidable ears and 
some had a nose projecting upwards. And some had the 
upper part of their bodies unusually long and bulky, some had 
a long and slender neck, some had dishevelled hair, and 
some one’s person was so thickly covered with hairs, that she 
appeared to have been cloaked in a blanket. Some had long 
ears some had a long forehead, some had a long belly, some 
had long breasts ; some had long lips ; some had their lips and 
chins stuck together, some had a long countenance and some 
had long knees. Some one was of short stature, some was 
tall, some crooked, some grim-visaged, some dwarfish, some 
one was of terribly dark colour ; some had a disfigured coun- 
tenance ; some had coppery eyes and a fearful face. Some 
were terrible-looking, some copper-colored, some black, some 
angry and some fond of quarrelling with each other ; and 
some had iron darts, hammers and mallets in their hands. 
Some had a face like that of a boar, some had a face like 
that of a deer, some like that of a tiger, some like that of a 
buffallo, some like that of a goat, and some like that of a 
jackal ; some had legs like those of a camel, some had those 
of an elephant, some those of a horse and some had 
their heads placed on their breasts. Some one had only one 




944 



RlMlVANA. 



hand some had only one leg. Some had ears like those of a 
horse, some like those of a cow, some like those of an as s, 
some like those of an elephant and others had ears like those 
of a lion. Some had very big noses, some had crooked 
and others were without any ; some had noses like those of 
an elephant and others had their noses on their foreheads. 
Some had their legs like those of elephants some had very 
huge legs ; some had like those of a cow, some had on their 
legs locks of hair like unto pillars, some had a terribly huge 
head, some had big breasts and others had spacious bellies, 
Some had faces and eyes beyond ordinary proportions. Some 
had a long face and tongue. And some had the face of a 
goat, some that of an elephant some that of a cow, some 
that of a boar some that of a horse and some that of an ass. 
Some of the RSLkshasees were grim-visaged and some hot- 
natured, quarrelsome and had darts aud maces in their hands. 
And some terrible Rakshasees of disfigured countenances, 
had smoky-coloured hairs. And they were all continually 
drinking wine — always fond of liquor and meat, and all 
their bodies were sprinkled with blood for their living 
on gore and flesh. And that foremost of monkeys 
found all these grim-visaged Rakshasees seated around 
that mighty tree enveloped with branches. And the grace- 
ful Hanum£n observed at the foot of that tree that worship- 
ful and blameless daughter of the king Janalca. She 
was bereft of all effulgence, racked with grief and ail 
her hairs were soiled with dirt. She appeared like a star fallen 
down on the earth on the wane of virtue. And famed though 
she was all over the world for her chastity, it was difficult 
for her now to see her husband. She had no excellent orna- 
ments — her attachment unto her husband was the only 
ornament. She was imprisoned by the lord of Rfikshasas 
and separated from all her friends, she appeared like a she- 
elephant separated from her band and bound and attacked 
by a lion, and like the rays of the Moon enveloped with 




StTNDA RA KANDA At. 



945 



clouds at the expiry of the rainy season. Her beauty was 
greatly faded (in consequence of her husband’s separa- 
tion) like unto a stringed instrument for want of a player. 
And ever engaged in her husband’s welfare she was 
thoroughly unworthy of being brought under the control 
of the Rikshasas. Being sunk in the abyss of grief and 
encircled by those Rakshasees she appeared in the forest 
of Asoka like unto Rohini possessed by Rahu. And Hanu- 
man beheld her there like a creeper divested of flowers. 
And having her person soiled with dirt and shorn of all 
ornaments she appeared in her hidden grace like unto a 
lotus covered with clay. And the monkey Hanuman, beheld 
that damsel, having the eyes of a young antelope, clothed 
with a soiled and shattered cloth. And though the coun- 
tenance of that worshipful one was shorn of all grace, her 
heart did not loose its loftiness in consequence of her 
husband’s prowess. And Sitft, of dark-blue eyes, was protected 
by virtue of her own character. And beholding SitSL, having 
the eyes of a young antelope, and terrified and casting her 
looks hither and thither like a hind and burning down the 
trees enveloped with leaves by her breath ; like unto a mass of 
grief and an upheaval of sorrow ; having well-proportioned 
limbs, and appearing graceful without ornaments, MSruti 
attained to an excess of delight. And beholding her having 
inebriete eyes, Hanuman shed tears of delight and bowed 
unto R&ghava. And having offered his obeisance unto RSma 
and Lakshmana the powerful Hanuman, greatly delighted 
in seeing Sit& ; remained there hidden. 



119 




KiMAVAyA. 



1 jV> 

SECTION XVI I I . 

A_ND beholding the forest filled with flowery trees «.r.l 
dc.-dring to have a full view of her, lie, well-nigh, spent the 
night. And at that late hour of the night, he heard the 
chantings of the Vedas by the Rakshasas, conversant with 
the six supplemental y parts of the Vedas,* engaged in the 
performance of sacrificial rites and knowing BrahmS. And 
thereupon the mighty Ten-headed Rakshasajiaving huge arms, 
awoke with the sounds of those auspicious instruments, 
pleasant unto ears. And awaking, that great and powerful 
lord of Rakshasas, having his cloth and garlands loosened, 
began to think of Vaidrhi. And that RSLkshasa, puffed up 
with pride, was passionately attached unto her and so he 
could not restrain his amour in him. And so adorned with 
all ornaments, he, casting his looks on the roads containing 
jewelled and golden gates and appearing in grace, entered the 
forest of Asokn, filled with various trees containing fruits and 
flowers of all seasons and with ponds ; beautified with various 
flowers ; variegated with inebricte and wondrous birds; filled 
with various beautiful wolves ; thronged with various deer 
and covered with fruits fallen on the earth. And one hun- 
dred damsels followed in the train of the son of Pulastyat 
like unto the damsels of the celestials and Gandharvas 
following Mahemlra. And among those fair ones, some 

carried cfiowncs and some fans. And some carrying water 
in olden j *rs Ik aded the train while others carrying the 
golden throne cove red with a coverlet followed it. And a 
f.ivourite damsel canied in her right hand a jewelled drink- 
ing bowl filled with wine. And another carrying the white 

* Grammar, Prosody, a tronomv, pronounciation, the meaning of the 
unusual terms and the ritual of the Hindu religion. — T. 

t Refers to R&vana, Tulastya bcinj his father— T. 




SUN DA RA KIND A M. 



947 



umbrella having golden ribs resembling the full moon and 
goose, followed in the train. And in this wise the excellent 
wives, of R&vann, having their eyes rendered sleepy with 
sleep and wine, followed their heroic husband like unto light- 
nings following the cloud. Their necklaces and keyuras were 
displaced, paste faded, hair dishevelled and they had drops 
of sweat on their faces. With sleep and intoxication, were 
reeling those fair ones of beautiful countenances, having 
their hairs with garlands disbanded and their persons wet 
with perspiration. And in this way those beloved wives, (of 
R£vana) having inebriete eyes, followed, out of amour and 
reverence, their husband. And their mighty husband, brought 
under the control of amcur and having his mind firmly at- 
tached unto Sita, proceeded slowly. And that monkey, son 
of MSruta, heard the sound of kanchces and nupuras of those 
excellent damsels. And the monkey Hanuman also beheld 
Ravana, of extraordinary deeds and of inconceivable 
prowess and strength, at the gate. His whole body was 
seen on all sides by the light of the lamps lighted with 
perfumed oil and carried by the Rakshasees before. He was 
inflamed with amour, pride and haughtiness and his expan- 
sive eyes were coppery and idle. And he appeared like 
Cupid himself just appearing in view, leaving behind his 
bow and arrows. And holding his excellent robe, covered 
with flowers, washed, set with jewels and white as the 
foam of the churned nectar, lie placed it in its proper place. 
And HanumSn, hiding himself on the tree, in the midst of many 
leaves and flowers, tried to recognise him as he approach- 
ed. And beholding him, that foremost of monkeys saw that 
highly famous king R&vana, surrounded by his excellently 
beautiful and youthful wives, enter that forest of enjoyment 
filled with birds and animals. There was a warder by name 
Sankukarna in that forest — highly powerful, wearing various 
ornaments and addicted to drinking. And by him was 
seen that lord of RSkshasas — the son of Visravasa. And 




94& RlMlYANA. 

that highly energetic monkey beheld that effulgent (RSvana) 
surrounded by excellent damsels like unto moon encircled 
by stars. And beholding him the monkey reflected — “This 
must be RSvana — for he is the person whom I saw sleeping 
in an excellent apartment in that city.'* Thinking this, that 
highly effulgent son of M&ruta — HanumSn leaped (high upon 
another branch). And effulgent as he was, that highly 
intelligent monkey hid himself on a branch covered with 
leaves, being unable to stand before the effulgence of that 
RSkshasa. And Rivana proceeded in that way, being anxious 
to behold the blue-eyed Sit5, having spacious breast, excel- 
lent hips and a lock of black hair* 



SECTION X»X* 



And thereupon beholding RSvana — the lord of Rftkshsaf* 
as, gifted with youth and beauty and adorned with an 
excellent dress, that excellent and blameless daughter of a 
king, Vaidehi, trembled like unto a plantain tree shaken by 
the wind. And having covered her belly with her legs 
and her breast with her hands, that one, having charming 
colour and expansive eyes, cried aloud. And arriving there 
the Ten-necked one beheld Vaidehi, guarded by the 
RSkshasees, poorly, racked with grief like unto a boat sunk in 
an ocean. Subject to hard penances, she, seated on the 
bare earth, appeared like a branch of a tree fallen on the 
ground. Her limbs, where he used to wear ornaments, were 
covered with dirt and albeit worthy of ornaments, appeared 
without any like unto a lotus covered with clay and therefore 
shining very indistinctly. And she was proceeding as it were 
unto that lion of a king — Rama, knowing bis own-self, in her 
mind’s charriot drawn by the horses of resolution. And not 
beholding the end of her grief, that damsel, attached voto 




SUNDARaKXNDAM. 



9i<J 

RSma, was keeping alone and reduced to a skeleton and 
overwbelmned with anxious thoughts and grief. And she 
was troubled like unto the daughter-in-law of the lord of 
serpents, of impeded course by means of incantations, and 
stricken with grief like unto Rohini, possessed by Ketu . And 
although born in a pious family, well behaved and good- 
natured and married according to their rites, she appeared 
to have been sprung from a low race and wedded according 
to their base ceremonials. She seemed like mighty fame 
disappearing, like respect disregarded, like intellect waning 
and hope disappointed ; like a sacred altar trampled, like 
royal mandate disobeyed, like the quarters burnt by a fire- 
brand ; like offerings unto God soiled ; like ,tlie disc of the 
r ull-moon stricken with darkness, a lotus distressed, an army 
.without a leader; like the ravs of the moon enveloped with 
Sloom, like a river of shallow water, like a sacrificial altar 
Possessed by an outcast, like the flame of fire extinguished ; 
*ke water fowls terrified and lotuses disturbed and petals 
-rushed by the trunks of elephants. And her grace greatly 
famished by the absence of her husband she appeared like a 
river whose liquid contents were dried up. And not clean- 
ing her limbs she appeared like a dark night. And that one 
nf graceful limbs, tender and worthy of living in a jewelled 
abode, being stricken with grief, seemed like a dried lotus- 
stalk just extracted from its bed. And she like the daughter- 
in-law of the lord of elephants.caught, separated from her band 
and tied to a pillar, was overwhelmed with grief and was sighing 
again and again. A long lock of dark-blue hair, taken not the 
least care of, was on her back ; and with this she appeared like 
unto the earth covered with dark-blue forests at the expiration 
of the rainy season. With fasts and grief, anxiety and fear, she 
was greatly weakened and reduced and gave up eating and 
took recourse to asceticism only. Stricken with grief, she 
seemed to have been offering prayers unto that foren.ost 
>f Raghus for the destruction of the Ten-necked one, like 




950 



Rl Ml YANA. 



those unto the deities with folded hands. And beholding 
blameless Maithilee, having expansive eyes with beau 
eye lashes, greatly attached unto R&ma, and we^ 
Ravana tempted her for his own destruction. 



SECTION XX. 

0:0 

Thereupon Ravana, with sweet words amd gestures 
pressed his own desire unto SitSh poorly, deprived of 
encircled by Rakshasees and leading the life of an asc 
“O thou having thighs like the trunks of elephants, v 
thou hast, beholding me, hidden thy breast and belly, per' 
thou art afraid of exposing thy person unto me. I do 
for thee, O thou having expansive eyes ; do thou esl 
me, O my dear one, O thou gifted with all accomplish^ 
and pleasant unto all persons. O SitS, here is no hu 
being or any Rakshasa assuming shapes at will, do 
therefore renounce all fear from me. O timid dar 
for certain it is the virtue of the R&kshasas that they ah 
visit others* wives or come by them by force. In spit 
this, O Maithilee, I do not touch thee for thou art not in 
the influence of amour — but for me, I am completely u 
its sway. Do not fear me, O worshipful damsel, confide ii 
O my beloved one, and become attached unto me. 
not give way to grief. A single lock of hair, to lie d 
on earth and useless fast — these do not become thee. AH 
ing me, O Maithilee, do thou enjoy excellent garla 
sandal, ornaments, costly wines, beds, seats, songs, d 
ing and music. Thou art a jewel of a female; do t 
not therefore remain in this guise. Put on thy ornan 
therefore. How shalt thou remain unadorned obtai 
me, () thou of a beautiful figure ? This thy beau 
youth is passing away, which like the curre.it ol a r 




sIuxdarakAxdam 



95 1 



vlien once pone, doth not turn bade. O thou of a fair look, 
laving created thee, the artist of Gods, the maker of 
:elestial beauties, hath ceased from his work, for a matcli 
)f thy beauty I find in none. Who is there, O Vaidehi, 
vho can withstand the influence of amour, getting thee, 
gifted with beauty and youth ? (What of others) even 
3rahma, the grand-father of the celestials, is moved. O 
hou having a moon-like countenance, and well-developed 
lips, whatever limbs of thine, I behold, I find my gaze fixed 
herein. O Maithilee, do thou become my spouse, and 
enounce this delusion. Do thou become the foremost queen 
)f all my excellent wives. O timid one, all the jewels that 
have collected from the three worlds, and all my kingdom 
! shall confer on thee. O sportive damsel, for thy satisfaction, 

! shall conquer the whole earth, engarlanded by many cities 
tnd bestow it upon JanakS. Find I none on this earth 
vho can withstand my prowess. Do thou behold my 
natchless prowess in battle. The celestiaU and Asuras 
ire incapable of withstanding me, defeated as they were 
)y me in battle and their pennons struck down. Do thou 
.herefore desire me to-day, dress thyself in excellent robes 
ind adorn thyself in beautifully brilliant ornaments. I shall 
>ehold thy dazzling beauty when adorned with ornaments. 
For pity unto me, do thou embellish thyself with ornaments, 
3 thou of a graceful countenance. O timid damsel, do thou, 
it thy pleasure, enjoy all sorts of comforts and luxuries, 
ind do thou, as thou desirest, confer wealth and land on 
>thers. Do thou confiding in me, ask for thy wished-for 
objects and do thou command me like unto an unmannerly 
lamsel. Thou shalt, by asking favours from me, satisfy the 
iesires of thy friends. O gentle lady, O thou of great 
enown, do thou observe my prosperity. What shalt 
hou do with R&ma, wearing bark, (J thou of pleasant 
>resence. Rama hath ceased from his endeavours for gaining 
ictory. He hath lost all his beauty, lives in the forest, is 




95 * 



RAMA FAN A. 



engaged in observances and always lies down on earth. I fear 
whether he is living still. O Vaidehi, R&ma shall not be 
able to see thee like unto the rays of the moon covered 
with blue clouds preceded by Valak&s .* R&ghava shall never 
get thee back from my hands, like unto Hiranyakasipt 
unable to regain his wife Kcerti from Indra. O thou of 
beautiful teeth, O thou having beautiful eyes, O sportive 
damsel, O timid one, thou dost steal my mind like unto Garuda 
catching serpents. Beholding thee, wearing a shattered 
silken cloth, slender and without any ornaments, I do not find 
any attachment in my own wives. O daughter of Janaka, 
do thou exercise, thy supremacy, over all my wives, living 
in my seraglio and gifted with all accomplishments. O thou 
having black hair, all my wives are foremost in beauty 
over the three worlds. And they shall all attend thee like 
unto Apsaras waiting upon the Goddess of wealth. Othou 
having beautiful eye brows and well-developed hips, do 
thou, along with me, enjoy at thy pleasure all the wealth 
and riches of Kuvera.f O worshipful damsel, in asceticism, 
strength or prowess, wealth or fame, R&ma is not my equal 
Do thou therefore at thy pleasure drink, enjoy and eat 
I shall confer on thee wealth and the whole earth. Do thos 
satisfy all thy desires in me, O fair damsel, and let thy friends 
be satisfied in thee. And adorned with a beautiful goldes 
necklace, O timid lady, do thou at thy pleasure, range 
with me, in the forests, situated on the bank of the oceao, 
and filled with flowery trees and black bees.” 



* A kind of crane. — T. 

t The God of wealth or Pluto in Greek myth. — T. 



SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



953 



SECTION XXI. 



Hearing those words of that terrible RSkshasa, Siti, 
itricken with grief and of feeble voice, slowly replied— 
Racked with grief, engaged in asceticism and weeping, 
SitA began to tremble. And that excellent damsel, devoted 
unto her husband, began to think of him. Placing a twig 
before, that one, of beautiful smile, said — “Do thou take back 
thy mind from me and place it in thy own wives. Like unto 
a sinner unworthy of praying for final emancipation, it doth 
not behove thee to expect to come by me. Devoted unto one 
husband I shall never perpetrate such an iniquitious act. 

I am born in a high and have been married in a pious 
family.” Having accosted RAvana thus, the well-known 
Vaidehi, turning her back, again spake unto him, saying — 
l4 I should not live with thee since I am another’s wife 
and chaste. Have thy eyes always on religion and do thou 
follow in the track of piety. Like unto thine own wives, 
others’ are worthy of being protected by thee, O ranger of 
the night. Making an example of thee, do thou enjoy with 
thy own wives. Forsooth those vicious-minded, those of 
agitated senses, who are not satisfied with their own wives, 
are brought to misery by others’ wives. (Methinks) there 
are no pious men here and even if there be any thou dost not 
follow him since thou hast such an adverse understanding, 
against human practice and usage. Or the considerate people 
have spoken the truth, but thou, for the destruction of the 
race of the Rakshasas, considering that false, hast llot 
followed it. Wealth, kingdom and cities — all are brought to 
naught when they are placed at the hands of a vicious and 
illiterate king. Obtaining thee, (therefore) as her king and 
for thy folly only, this city of LankA, abounding in jewels, 
shall soon be ruined. O Rlvaria, every one delighteth in 



120 




954 



XAjl/lrAlVA. 



the destruction of that inconsiderate being, who bringeth 
about his own destruction and is engaged in the perpetration 
of evil deeds. And in this way, thyself, the perpetrator ot 
vicious acts, meeting with thy end, those persons who had 
been tvranized by thee, shall, delightedly, say — “Oh! blessed 
are we since this terrible (R£kshasa) hath met with his end. 
With wealth or riches thou shalt not be able to tempt me. 
As the rays of the sun belong to him, so I am Rdghava's 
only. I Living laid my head on the beautiful arms of that 
lord of men, how shall 1 place it again on another's ? Like 
unto the knowledge of one God monopolized by the Brahma* 
nas only, I am the spouse of that lord of earth only, cognisant 
of higher truths and marrying me according to the pious 
ceremonials. May good betide thee, O RSvana. Do thou 
take me unto R&ma, stricken with grief as I an>, like unto 
a she-elephant anxiously wailing in the forest brought to the 
lord of elephants. It behoveth thee to make friends with 
Rama, that best of men, if dost thou desire to maintain thy 
empire and dost not wish to bring about thy own destruction. 
It is known to the world, that R2ma knoweth well the 
sanctions of religion and is kind unto them who seek his 
shelter. Do thou seek his friendship, if dost thou wish to 
maintain thy life. Do thou propitiate him therefore who is 
kind to his dependents and it becometh thee to take me 
respectfullv unto him. Thou shalt meet with thy well-being 
if dost thou in this wise confer me on that best of Raghus. 
And mighty is the disaster that shall befall thee, if dost thou 
fellow any other procedure. Thunderbolt, even, when hurled, 
may leave thee, Death himself may overlook thee — but there 
is 'no safety for thee, it RAghava, the lord of men is enraged. 
Thou shalt hear the terrible sound of the twang of R&ma** 
how, like unto the sound of the thunderbolt hurled by Indra. 
Soon shall arrows, hearing the names of Rama and Lakshin ana 
and having lierv l eads like those of snakes, alight here. 
And cove i ed with banka leaves they shall undoubtedly coyw 




SITNDA R aKAND AM. 



V55 



the whole city and. devastate it by destroying all the Raksh- 
sas. Like unto Garuda pulling up the snakes, the Garuda- 
like Rima shall pull up thy snake-like RSkshasas. And 
like unto Vishnu recovering the effulgent Sree (the Goddess 
of wealth) from the Asuras, by crossing over the three worlds 
with three foot-steps, my husband, the conqueror of foes, shall 
recover me from thee. Janasthina hath been devastated, the host 
of R&kshasas hath been killed, and thou hast been disabled. 
Truly thou hast perpetrated an impious deed. O R&kshasa y 
those two lions among men going out to enquire about the 
illusive deer, I was ravished by thee, entering the empty 
hermitage, O vile wight. And like unto a dog incapable 
of standing before a tiger, it would have been impossible 
for thee, to wait there in the presence of Rama and Laksh- 
mana. If dost thou engage in conflict with them, thy 
wealth and friends shall be of no avail unto thee (and 
thou shalt be dis-comfitted) like unto one-handed Asura 
Vitra by the two handed Indra.* Soon shall my husband, 
with the assistance of Lakshmana, draw out thy life with 
arrows, like unto the sun drying up, by his rays, shallow 
water. Whether dost thou repair to the abode of Kuvera, 
or whether dost thou, terrified, take refuge unto the assembly 
of Varuna, thou shalt, for certain, be destroyed by the son 
of Da^aratha, like unto a mighty tree broken down by 
thunderbolt. 



* The allusion is — the mighty Asura Vitra fought with Indra for a long 
time even after he had his one hand chopped off. • T. 




956 



ft A Mir ANA. 



SECTION XXII. 



Hearing those harsh accents, that lord of Rikshasas, 
replied unto Sit&, of comely presence, with the following 
unpleasant words’ — “It is generally found on earth that 
the more a woman is courted by a man, the more she is 
brought under his influence. (But for thee) the more kindly 
I have been behaving towards thee, the more roughly I have 
been treated. Truly doth my love for thee keep in control 
the wrath like unto a good charioteer restraining the 
swerving stead. O mighty is amour unto men, for on 
whom this amour falleth, albeit she is an object of wrath, 
becomes an object of kindness and affection. O thou of 
fair countenance, it is for this reason 9 that 1 do not destroy 
thee, although thou, who art engaged in false asceticism, art 
worthy of being killed and dishonored. O Maithilee, for each 
and every one of all those harsh words which thou hast 
used by me, dost thou deserve death." Having spoken 
thus unto Vaidehi, R&vana, the lord of Rftkhasas, having 
his wrath subdued, again bespake Sit ft: “1 shall wait 

for those two months, of which I have made a contract, 
after which thou shalt have to share my bed, O thou of a 
comely presence. And even then if thou dost refuse to regard 
me as thy husband, my cooks shall mince thy limbs with 
steel and serve thee for my morning meal. 11 Beholding 
the lord of R&kshasas remonstrate with the daughter of 
Janaka in this wise, the daughters of the celestials and 
Gandharbas became exceedingly sorry. . Some with lips, some 
with eyes, and some with gestures of their faces, they all con* 
soled Sita, thus distressed by that R&kshasa. And thus cob* 
soled by them, and being proud of her good conduct and her 
husband’s heroism, Sit& thus addressed R&vana, the loid 
of R&kshasas, “Forsooth there is no person in this chy 




SUN DA RA KIND AM. 



957 



who desiretli tliy welfare and therefore preventelh thee from 
such an impious deed. Who is there in the three worlds, 
who even dcsireth me in mind, who am the spouse of the 
virtuous-souled (R&ma) like unto Indra’s Sachee. O thou 
the vilest of the R&kshasas, for using- those vicious words 
towards the spouse of R&ma, of immeasured prowess, repair* 
ing whither shalt thou escape vengeance ? Like unto 
an infuriated elephant encountering a hare in the forest, thou 
shalt O Vile ! a hare as thou art, meet with that elephant- 
like R§ma. Thou art not ashamed of railing that lord of 
Ikshwakus, so long as dost thou not come within his ken. 

0 base! why do not thy grim, terrible, coppery eyes, looking 
so viciously at me, fall down on earth. O vicious wretch, 

1 am the spouse of that virtuous -souled (R5ma) and daughter- 
in-law of Da^aratha — using these vile words towards 
me, why dost not thy tongue fall off? O Ten- necked 
one, I can instantly reduce thee to ashes but for Rama's 
mandate and my ascetic observances. Thou couldst not have 
ravished me in the presence of the highly intelligent Rama. 
And undoubtedly for thy destruction this hath been brought 
about by God. Thou art heroic and Kuvera's brother and 
great in prowess, why didst thou then take me by stealth 
after despatching Rima away from the hermitage ?” Hear- 
ing those words of SitS, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, 
whirling his grim eyes, looked towards the daughter of Janaka. 
He was like unto a mass of blue clouds and his arms and 
necks were long and spacious. He was gifted with elephan- 
tine gaits and his tongues and eyes were sharp and flaming. 
The top of his crown was shaking and lie had charming 
garlands around his neck and his person sprinkled with paste. 
He had crimson-coloured garlands and clothes on and his 
charming arms were adorned with ornaments. Encircled 
with a sword-belt around liis waist he appeared like unto 
Mandara, entwined by a snake at the time of the churning 
>f the ocean. With his two plump arms, that lord of 




9=3 



RA m a van a. 



K&kshasas appeared like unto the hill Mandara with its two 
huge summits. And adorned with a pair of Kundalas * resembl- 
ing the newly risen Sun he looked like a hill covered with 
two Asoka trees enveloped with crimson flowers and leaves. 
He was like unto Kalpa\ tree and spring incarnate. 
And albeit adorned, he looked terrible like unto a Caitya\ on 
the cremation-ground. And hav ing his eyes red hot with ire, 
sighing again and again like unto a snake and casting his 
looks upon Sita, R&vnna addressed her again, saying, — '0 
thou following asceticism, this thy vow is without any 
meaning and beyond the pale of morality. Even shall I 
destroy thee to-day like unto the Sun dispelling darkness 
with his rays.” Having thus addressed Maithilee, the ini- 
mical king Ravana cast his looks towards the grim-visaged 
Rakshasees. And among those R&kshasees, some had huge 
ears, some had ears like those of kine,some had ears as long as 
arms, some had long ears and others were without any. And 
some had legs like those of an elephant ; some had like those of 
a cow and some had legs covered with hairs. And some had 
one eye, some had one leg, some had capacious legs and some 
were without any. And some had huge heads and necks and 
some had breast and belly beyond proportions and some had 
faces and eyes above human size. Some had huge tongues 
and nails. And some were without noses. And some had 
leonine faces, some had faces like those of kine and some 
had those of boars. And casting his look towards such 
Rakshasees, he said — ‘‘Ye Rakshasees, do ye all endeavour 
to bring Sita, the daughter of Janaka, under my control. 
By good or bad conduct, by conciliation or gift, by threat or 
blandishment, do ye so endeavour as Vaidehi’s soul might be 
bent unto me.” And having ordered thus again and again, 

* A kind of ornament worn on ears. — T. 

t A fabulous tree granting everything desired. — T. 

t A monument or sculpture raised in honor of a deceased person on tk* 
site of a funeral pvre. — T. 




SUN DA RA KA NDA M 



959 



that lord of R&kshas^, stricken with amour and ire, address- 
ed Sitft, roaring fiercely. And thereupon approaching speedily 
and embracing the Ten-necked one, one KSkshasee named 
Dh&nyamalini bespake him : — “Do thou sport with me. ; 
0 great king. What shalt thou do with her ? — O lord of 
R&kshasas — a human being, poorly and of a pale countenance. 
O great king, forsooth, the celestials have not destined for 
her enjoyment all those objects which thou hast procured 
by thy prowess. And again he who desireth for an unwilling 
dame burnetii his own person — and he who desireth for a 
willing damsel, attaineth excess of delight.” Having said 
this, the R&kshasee took away Ravana by force. And that 
k&kshasa too, resembling a mass of clouds, laughing, turned 
back. And that Ten-necked one, strode away as if shakingthe 
whole earth and passed within (his queen’s) abode resembling 
the effulgent Sun. And encircling R&vana those daughters 
of celestials Gandharbas and Nagas, entered into an excel- 
lent abode. And having remonstrated with and left behind, 
the firm and pious Sita with a trembling person, Ravana, 
possessed by amour entered into his own palace. 



SECTION x x 1 1 i. 

XIaving spoken thus unto Maithilee and commanded the 
host of the Rikshasees, RAvana, a terror unto his enemies, 
went away. And after that lord of Rakshasas had gone 
away and entered his inner apartment, the hideous R&ksha* 
sees drew near SitS. And approaching Sita that terrible 
host, almost faint with ire, addressed Vaidehi with the 
following harsh words — “Thou dost not regard it highly, 
Sita, that thou shalt become the chosen wife of that higli- 
souled, and great R&vana, the Ten-necked son of Pulastya.” 




960 



rXmAyana. 



Thereupon another Rakshasee name<J Ekjati, with eyes 
rendered coppery with ire, addressing Siti. having a small 
navel, said, — “Pula sty a is the fourth of the six PrajSpatis,* 
a mind-born son of Brail m& and celebrated in the world. 
And the glorious ascetic, by name Bishrav& was the mind- 
born son unto Pulastya, effulgent like unto PrajSpatis. 0 
large-eyed damsel ! Of Visravft came R&vana terrible unto 
his enemies. And it behoveth thee to become the consort of 
that lord of Rakshasas. Scorn not the words I say unto thee, 
O thou of comely presence. 1 ' Thereupon another R&ksha- 
see named llarijalft, having the eyes of a cat, and whirling 
them with ire, said — ‘ It becometh thee to be the wife 
of that lord of R&kshasas who smote the thirty three 
celestials and their lord in battle. Dost thou not desire to 
be his wife, who is heroic, of indomitable prowess and 
who doth uot turn back in battle? And turning away in 
scorn from his beloved wife, highly esteemed, the mighty 
king Ravana, desireth for thee. And leaving his inner 
apartment enriched with thousand of females and adorned 
with various jewels, R&vana shall adore thee. 19 And then 
followed another Rakshasee by name Bikati— “The king, 
who by his terrible prowess subdued the Gatidharbasf and 
Nagas.J in battle, hath stood by thee. O foolish damsel, 
why dost thou not wish to be the consort of that liigh-souled 
lord of Rikshasas — Ravana, gifted with wealth and riches." 
And then followed another Rakshasee named Durmukhee.— 
“Why dost thou not approach him, O thou having expansive 
eyes, by whose fear, the sun doth not shine, and the wind 
doth not blow. O dame, why dost thou not wish to be the 
consort of Ravana, the lord of Rftkshasas, at whose command 
the trees shower blossoms and the hills and clouds poar 
down water. Why dost thou not make up thy mind to be 



* PrajApitis arc the lords of the created beings first created by Brahml. — T. 
t Heavenly singers and musicians who belong to the heaven of India.— T. 
X Serpent-gods who dwell in the regions uuder the earth. 



SUNDARA kXndam 



961 



he wife of Rivana ? O damsel, O worshipful dame, we 
iave spoken thus for thy welfare. Do thou comply with 
>ur request or thou shalt surely die,” 



SECTION XXIV, 

Thereupon all those Rakshasees, having terrible faces 
igain and again pursued SitSL with reproaches rough and 
•ude. — “Why dost thou not desire, O Sit5, to live in his 
niter apartment, liked by all and abounding in costly bed- 
steads. O woman, thou regardest highly to be the wife of 
1 man. Do thou turn back from R&ma — thy desire shall 
lever be satisfied. Do thou spend happily thy days with 
jur lord — Havana, the R£kshasa chief, who makes his own 
:he treasures of the three worlds. Thou art a woman, O 
liou of comely presence, and therefore doth thy fancy cling 
to Rama, O thou of a blameless countenance, who is a man, 
deprived of his kingdom, overwhelmed with disasters and 
hath his desires frustrated.” Hearing the words of those 
Rlkshasees, the lotus-eyed Silft, with her eyes full of tears 
said. — “What ye have all said and which is against human 
usage and vicious, doth not find place in my mind. A 
woman cannot be the wife of a R&kshasa. Eat me up if 
you will, 1 will never follow your words. Poor or deprived 
of kingdom, he who is my hunband, is my preceptor. I am 
;ver devoted unto him, like Subarchalfc* unto the Sun. Like 
unto the great Sachi standing by Sakra, Arundhuti by Vas- 
liishta, Rob ini by the Moon, Lopamudra by Agistya, Sukanya 
by Chyabana, S&bitree by Satyab&na, Sreematee by Kapila, 
Madayantee by Sandasa,Kcshince by Sagara and Dama^anti 
the daughter of the king Vecnia by her husband Nala, I shall 
ever remain devoted to my husband R&ma, the foremost of 
the descendants of Ikshawku.” Hearing the words of Sita, ail 

* The wife of the sun. — T. 



1 2 1 



962 



RlMlYANA. 



those RSkshasees despatched by Rfivana, almost beside them- 
selves with ire, again covered her with reproaches rough and 
rude. And HanumSLn remained all along speechless and 
hidden on the Shingshapa tree. And that monkey heard all 
those demons remonstrate with Site! in this way. And those, 
influenced with ire, approached the trembling SitS. and 
encircling her, licked again and again their long and burning 
lips. And taking up instantly spears, they exceedingly wroth, 
menaced her, saying — ‘She is not worthy of having R&vana, the 
lord of the Rakshasas, as her lord.” Being thus remonstrated 
with by those terrible RUkshasees, that excellent damsel, 
shedding tears, neared the Singshapa tree. And the large- 
eyed SitS, encircled by the R&kshasces, remained there sunk 
in grief. And all those hideous demons, showered reproaches, 
from all sides, on her, greatly reduced, of a poorly counten- 
ance, and wearing a soiled cloth. Thereupon a grim-visagrd 
demon, angry, having hideous teeth and a huge belly extending 
downwards, by name Vinati, spake, saying : — “O Sit5, thou 
hast shown enough of attachment towards thy husband. 
But, O gentle dame, excess of any thing tends to evil. We 
are satisfied. And may good betide thee ! Thou bast acted 
worthily like a woman. Do thou hear, O Maithilee, what 
1 say for thy welfare. Do thou accept, R&vana, the lord of 
the KJLkshasa host, as thy husband. He withstands power* 
fully his enemies like unto Vasava, the lord of the celestials, 
charitable, kind unto all, and sweet-speeched. And for- 
saking Rama, a poor wight, do thou take R&vana (as thy 
husband). Having thy person sprinkled with celestial paste 
and adorned with excellent ornaments, do thou from to-day 
O Vaidchi, O thou of comely presence, become the queen of 
all the worlds, like unto Sachee of the lord of the celestiab 1 
and svaha * of the lire. What shalt thou do with Rima, 

* An exclamation used in making an oblation to the Gods. A personifica- 
tion of the preceding as the wife of fire and Goddess presiding over ban* I 
offerings. — T. j 




SUXDARAKlNDAM. 



9^3 



O Vaidehi, poor and of limited life ? This is what I say 
and if dost thou not follow it we shall all instantly banquet 
on thee.” And thereupon another Rakshasee named Vikata, 
having her breast hanging long, exercised with ire, and 
clinching her fist, addressed, roaring, Sita — <( 0 foolish daugh- 
ter of the king of Mithila, we have put up with all thy 
foolish words only out of compassion, and because thou art 
a feeble being. It will not lead to thy well-being if thou 
dost not hear our words. Thou hast been brought here, the 
other side of the ocean, difficult of being approached by 
others. Thou hast come within the terrible abode of Ravana 
O Maithilee, and hast been shut up in his room guarded by 
us all. And even, Purandara’s* self cannot save you. Do 
thou therefore hear, O Maithilee, my well-meaning words. 
Why dost thou shed tears ? Renounce thy useless grief. 
Do thou become happy and delighted, renouncing thy conti- 
nued melancholy. Do thou sport, O Sita, at thy pleasure, 
with the lord of the Rakshasas. We know, for certain, O 
timid damsel, that the youth of the females, is very transient. 
And so long as thy youth doth not fade, do thou pass thy days 
happily, O thou having inebrite eyes, with the lord of 
Rlkshasas, in picturesque gardens, and mountain forests. 
Do thou take, O fair damsel, Ravana, the lord of the Raksh- 
sas, for thy husband, and thousands of females shall be placed 
at thy service. If dost thou not follow, what I say, O 
Maithilee, I shall taking out thy heart, banquet on it.” 
Thereupon another grimvisaged Rakshasee, named, 
Chandodor&, shaking her terrible spear, said — “Beholding 
this Sit5 having the eyes of a young antelope and her breast 
trembling with fear, my earnest desire, as I am enciente , 
hath been to banquet on her large eyes, lever, spleen, her 
plump hands, heart, other limbs and head.” Thereupon 
another Rakshasee named Praghasa said — “I shall grind 
the throat of this cruel woman. What are you doing, sitting 



* Another name of Irvdra — the lord of the celestials. — T. 





964 



RAMAl a ft a. 



here ? Ye shall then relate unto the king that the woman 
is dead. And undoubtedly he shall say *Do ye eat her up." 
And thereupon another Rlkshasee named Ajftmukhee said 
“1 do not like quarrels. Let us all divide her into equal 
portions. Bring soon our favourite drink and various 
garlands.” Then followed another Rdkshasee by name 
Surpanakha, — ‘ I do fully concur with what Aj&mukhi hath 
said. Bring soon wine, the remover of all griefs. Banquetting 
on human flesh 1 shall dance before the queen NikumbliiU.” 
Being thus threatened by those grim-visaged R&kshasees 
Sita, resembling the daughter of a celestial, renouncing pati- 
ence, began to weep. 



SECTION XXV. 



.A.ND those hideous Rakshasees thus tlireatning her with 
reproaches rude and rough, the daughter of the king Jaoaka 
began to weep. And being thus addressed by those Rlksha- 
sees, Vaidehi, of subdued soul, being greatly terrified, said, 
having her voice choked with vapour, — “A woman can never 
be the wife of a Rdkshasa. E it me up if you will, 1 shall 
never follow your words.” And being surrounded by the 
RSkshasees and threatened by R3vana, Sita, resembling the 
daughter of a celestial, stricken with grief, could not console 
herself. And trembling, she shrank from their presence like 
unto a strayed fawn surrounded by wolves. And resorting 
to a flowery branch of an Asoka tree, she sunk in grief, 
thought upon her lord. With tears she bathed her beautiful 
breast and oppressed with woe, she could not reach the other 
bank of the ocean of grief. Like a plantain tree shaken by the 
breeze, she shook and fell down trembling (on the earth). 
And being afraid of the Rlkshasees, her cheeks forsook their 
native hue. And herself trembling, her pretty long lock of 




SUiXDA RA KlNDAM . 



965 



hair also shook and appeared like a serpent moving this way 
and that. Overwhelmed with grief and beside herself with 
ire, the daughter of the king of M ith il«L, wept and exclaimed 
sorrowfully,— “O mother Kausalya ! O queen Sumitra ! true 
is the saying of the wise that death doth never approach un- 
timely the male or the female. Or else 1 would not have lived 
for a moment, separated from R&ma and oppressed by the 
R&kshfaseea as I am. Limited is my virtue, and therefore 1 
am to die the death of a poor deserted thing like unto a 
bark driven by the blast in the midst of the ocean. Debarred 
frQin my husband’s sight and tortured by the hideous demons, 
I shall sink* oppressed with woes, like unto the banks of a 
river, washed by the water. Oh blest are they who have 
been resting their eyes upon my grateful and s wee t-speec bed 
lord of leonine gaits, having eyes resembling lotus petals ! 
And separated from R&ma of subdued soul, it is as difficult 
for we to breathe as for him who hath drank up virulent 
poison. What mighty iniquity had I perpetrated in my 
previous existence that I have met with this terrible disaster l 
1 wish to renounce my life under this load of grief — but alas ! 
I am surrounded by the RSkshasees and cannot meet RSLma. 
Oh ! cursed is this subject human life, that they cannot 
reiloUQCO it even at their pleasure 1 ’ ! 



SECTION XXVI. 



Saying this, the daughter of the king Janaka, bathed her 
countenance with tears and hanging down her head began 
to lament. And she began to roll on the earth like unto 
a colt as if she was mad, possessed by a devil and had lost 
her sense. “I, the spouse of Rima, who was drawn away 
at a distance by the R3kshasa (M&richa) assuming shapes 
at will, was seized and borne away by R&vana. A captive 




g66 



RlMAVANA . 



of the Rakshasas, subject to their terrible threats and taunts, 
sunk in grief and anxiety, — I desire not to keep my life. Of 
what avail are wealth, ornament and life unto me, who am 
living in the midst of the Rakshasas and separated from 
Rama, of the mighty car ? Forsooth my life is made of 
stone, imperishable and immortal since it is not riven asunder 
even by this mighty grief. Woe to me ! who am unchaste 
and vile and my life is vicious, since breathe I still in the 
absence of my lord. What of fixing my fancy on that night- 
ranger, my meaner foot even shall not touch him ? That 
(demon) who is courting me in this terrible way, doth 
not know himself, his own race and that I loathe him so 
much. What more shall I speak unto you, 1 shall never 
consent to R5vana\s prayer, I might be rent from limb to limb 
or burnt in fire. R&ghava is grateful, true, wise and kind. 

I fear it is through my ill-luck that he doth not feel pity for 
me. Will he not take me back who alone slew the thou* 
sands of the Rashasas in Janasth&na? I have been captured 
by Ravana, a Rakshasa of feeble prowess. Forsooth my 
lord is capable of slaying this Ravana in conflict. Will 
not that Rama regain me, by whom was killed in the 
forest of Dandaka, Viradha, the foremost of the R&kshasa 
crew ? Although situated in the midst of the ocean, LankS 
is unapproachable by others, but RSghava’s arrows shall also 
reach here. (I am at a loss to ascertain) why R&ma of 
firm prowess, doth not regain me, his beloved spouse who 
have been borne away by the) Rakshasa. Metliinks Rama 
do tli not know that I am here, or else, powerful as he is, he 
would not have put up with this insult. That lord of vultures, 
who could have informed Raghava, of my being borne away 
by the Rakshasa, was killed by Ravana in the battle. 0 
great was the work done by him, who, old as he was, for mf 
sake, addressed himself to bring about R&vana’s destruction. 
If Rdghava could know that I was here, he, exceedingly 
wroth, would have cleared the earth with his arrows, of the 




SUM DA R A KlN DA M. 



9 67 



R&kshasas. He would have then burnt down the city of Lanka, 
dried up the deep and blotted out the name and fame of 
Ravana. And from each ruined home would have risen the 
Rakshasa widows* groans and cries like unto those of mine. 
And instituting enquiries, along with Lakshmana, he shall 
soon reduce Lanka to this plight. And observed by them 
the enemy shall not live for a moment. And in no time, 
shall Lanka, assume the appearance of a cremation ground, 
having all her high ways enveloped with smoke issuing out of 
the funeral pyres, and filled with vultures. And soon shall this 
desire of mine be fulfilled. All these words of mine do sound 
improbable now but they all indicate your misfortune. Besides 
from these bad omens, that are to be seen here, it appeareth, 
that Lanka shall soon be shorn of her grace. The lord of the 
Rakshasas, the vicious Ravana being killed, forsooth shall 
Lanka, divested of wealth, appear like a widow. This Lanka, 
which is now full of pious ceremonies, 'shall, on the death of 
the Rakshasas and their master, appear like a husbandless 
woman. For certain, shall I soon hear the cries and groans 
in every house, of the daughters of the Rakshasas worn with 
grief. If that heroic R&ma, having dark-blue eyes, comes to 
know that I am in the abode of the Rakshasas, the city of 
LankS shall be burnt down with his arrows and shall be 
stricken with darkness and shorn of grace and all the fore- 
most of the Rakshasas shall be destroyed. The time which 
was appointed by the vile and cruel Rivana, hath arrived. 
And that vicious wretch hath resolved to destroy me now. 
There is no crime which cannot be perpetrated by those 
vicious demons. Mighty is the disaster that shall arise on 
account of this crime — the R&kshasas who live on flesh do 
not know what virtue is. Forsooth shall the R&kshasa serve 
me for his morning meal. What shall I do without my lord 
of comely presence ? Debarred from my husband’s presence, 
stricken with grief and not beholding Rama, having dark-blue 
eyes, I shall soon meet with death. R&ma, the elder brother 




963 



It AM A }'ANA. 



of Bharata, doth not know that 1 am still alive or else he 
and Lakshmana would have ransacked the whole world for 
me. Or renouncing his body on this earth for my grief, the 
heroic elder brother of Lakshmana, hath repaired to the 
celestial region. Blessed are the celestials, Gandharba*, 
Siddhas and mighty ascetics who are beholding my heroic 
lotus-eyed K&ma. Ur that highly intelligent royal asceli: 
desirous of securing piety and freed from tile troubles of 
life, hath no need of a wife like me. Or people ha\e fancy 
for what they see aud which disappearetli as soon as the 
object is out of sight. The ungrateful are capable of renoun- 
cing their love, but not Rama. Or there might be some 
folly in me. Ur on the wane of my good luck have 
been separated irom the excollent Riina. Death is more 
preferable unto me than life since I have been separated 
Irom the high-souled heroic K&ma, of unblemished character 
and the slayer of toes. Or those two brothers, the foremost 
of men, laying aside their weapons, and living on fruits and 
roots, have been wandering in the forest. Or those two 
heroic brothers K§ma and Lakshmana, have been, by trea- 
chery, put to death, by the vicious-suuled R&vana, the lord 
of R4ksliasas. At this time of distress, 1 do with all my heart 
long tor death, — ^but alas !j even death is not approaching 
me in this my misery. Oh blessed are those lugh-soulcd, 
great ascetics abiding by truth and having their senses in 
control, who have no objects of love or displeasure. They 
are not distressed with misery for their objects of love or 
grief for them whom they do not love. They are freed from 
them and I do bow unto those liigh-souled ones. Being 
forsaken by the beloved R&ma, knowing his owuself, and 
brought under the control of R&vana, I shall renounce 
my life/* 




SUADA Ra KIND A M. 



9*9 



SECTION XXVII . 



Toeing thus addressed angrily by Sita, some of those 
3&kshasees, beside themselves with ire, proceeded to relate this 
unto the vicious-soulcd Rtvana. And approaching Sita 
those grim-visaged demons again addressed her with words 
rode and rough. “ O vile Sita, O thou bent on committing sin, 
we RSkshasees shall to-day devour thy flesh to the best of our 
tatisfaction.” Beholding those vile demons threaten Sits, a 
't&kshasa matron, wise and old, named, Trijati cried — “O 
rile demons, do ye eat your own persons* but do not devour 
5il&, the daughter of Janaka and the esteemed daughter- 
n-law of the king Da^aratha. I dreamt a terrible dream 
ast night which made my down stand on their end. And 
n that dream I foresaw the overthrow of the Rakshasa race 
ind the conquest of her husband.” And being thus address- 
id by Trijata, those demons, exercised with wrath and 
errified, accosted her with the following words, — ‘‘Do thou 
elate (unto us) what sort of dream didst thou dream last 
light-” And hearing those words proceeding from the 
mouths of the Rakshasees, Trijata began to describe the 
iream she had at the latter end of the night, — “I saw Rama, 
wearing garlands and clothed in white, ride in a celestial 
rharriot, along with Lakshmana, made of ivory, traversing 
;he etheriai regions and drawn by a hundred steeds. I saw 
in my dream to-night, that Sita, clad in the purest white, 
ippearing on a snow-white hill beaten by the waves of the 
>cean, had at last met Rama, like unto light joined to the 
Sun. And I again saw Rama and Lakshmana appear in 
effulgence, seated on a huge elephant, having four tusks 
and resembling a bull. Thereupon those two (brothers), 

• The proper expression, I think, should be — “Eat me.” The commenta- 
or Ram&nuja explains Atmanam as your own bodies. — T. 



122 





' 97 ° 



RllUl FAN A. 



resplendant like unto the Sun by their own effulgence, ani 
wearing white garlands and clothes, appeared near Janaka* 
daughter. And the lotus eyed Janaki, on the top of the hill 
situate on the welkin, first fell on the lap of her husband 
and then stationed herself on the neck of the elephant 
guided by her husband. Then I saw Sit§ rubbing the Sun and 
the Moon with her two hands. And then that best of the 
elephants, with those two princes and the large eyed Siti on 
him, stood high above Lankfi. I again saw RSma, clad in 
white, and adorned with garlands, ride along with Lakshtnana 
in a charriot drawn by eight white bullocks. 1 again saw 
that highly energetic, best of men — R&ma, having truth for 
his prowess, along with his brother Lakshmana and Siti flee 
to Northern realms, ascending a celestial flowery charriot 
resembling (in brightness) the Sun. And I saw Ri van a too, 
shaved and shorn, besmeared with oil, wearing a crimson 
cloth, drinking honey, wearing a garland of Karavira flowers, 
fall down on earth from the flowery charriot. And dragged 
by a woman, shaved, wearing a red cloth and garlands 
and sprinkled with crimson paste, Rivana was again seen 
by me riding in a charriot drawn by asses. And quaffing oil, 
laughing and dancing, that one of agitated senses, forgetting 
himself sped on the charriot to the South.* And I again 
saw Havana, the lord of the R&kshasas, stricken with fear, 
fall, headless, down on the earth. And then rising all on a 
sudden, and uttering obscene and inconsistent words like unto 
a maniac, Ravana overwhelmed with fear, and amazement, 
and intoxicated, fell into a mass of dirt, stinking and 
resembling the very hell. And again proceeding to the 
South he entered into a lake devoid of mud and water. And 
a dark woman, clad in a crimson cloth, and bedaubed with 
mud, dragged the Ten-necked demon, entwining herself 



In the south is the region of ^ am.i.the God of Death and hence his going 
* ■> the suuth is not an auspicious si^n. — T. 




SUN DA RA KIND AM, 



97 * 

round his neck. Then followed the mighty Kumvakarna* 
md all the sons of R&vana, shaved and shorn and besmeared 
rith oil. And they all proceeded southward — the Ten-necked* 
lemon on a boar, Indrajitf on a porpoise, and Kumvakarna 
cm a camel. I saw only Biveesana, with a white umbrella 
and accompanied by four courtiers, range in the welkin. 
And there was audible in the large assembly sound of music 
and stringed instruments. And all the Rakshasas wearing 
Crimson clothes and garlands, were quaffing oil. I 
-MW the royal and picturesque city Lanka with her steeds, 
cars and elephants, drowned in the ocean, having her gate- 
^ ways and ornamented arches broken. And in Lanka, covered 
with dust, R&kshasa women, laughing, and making terrible 
sound, were engaged in quaffing oil. I saw all the leading 
R&kshasas — Kumvakarna and others, dark-hued and wearing 
crimson clothes, emerged in an abyss of cow dung. Do ye 
therefore fly at some distance, and will find that Raghava 
shall regain Sita. And exercised with ire he shall destroy 
you all along with the Rakshasas. Raghava shall never 
brook, his esteemed and beloved spouse, living in the forest, 
being taunted and threatened by you. No more with rough 
words therefore ; do you console the lady and humbly pray 
her to forgive you. This I think proper. Surely shall she, 
divested of misfortune, be reconciled to her beloved 
and excellent husband, regarding whom, in her misery, I 
have dreamt such a dream. Ye Rakshasees ! You have 
threatened her, do ye implore her forgiveness — no more 
with harsh words. Forsooth, from Raghava shall proceed 
the mighty disaster of the Rakshasas. If Maithilee, the 
daughter of the king Janaka, be pleased with you (for 
your imploring her forgiveness) you might be saved from 
the mighty disaster. 1 do not perceive any inauspicious 

* R&vana’s brother.— T. 

f Rtvana’s son — the name signifies the conqueror of the lord of the celes- 
tial* — T. 





97 * 



RAX'A VAX a. 



mark on the person of this large-eyed dame. Ft appears 
from the paleness of her countenance that she hath been 
overcome by misfortune. And I saw (in my dreamt this 
worshipful dan.sel, unworthy of any misfortune, stationed 
in the welkin. Verily 1 do perceive, before me, the satisfaction 
of Vaidehi's end, the destruction of the lord of the R&kshasas 
and the conquest of Raghava. Behold l there, her left eye, 
spacious, as a lotus-petal, is dancing to hear this pleasant 
dream announcing the satisfaction of her own end. And her 
left arm is also dancing with joy, all on a sudden. And her 
excellent beautiful left thigh, resembling the trunk of an 
elephant, is also dancing as if indicating, that she shall at 
no distant date, be reconciled to RSghava. And the birds, 
again and again, entering their nests, and highly delighted 
are pouring forth their notes announcing the advent of a 
happy occasion.” Thereupon that modest dame, greatly 
delighted in the prospective conquest of her husband, said— 
•‘If this be true I shall save you all.” 



SECTION XXV I II.* 



Hearing those unpleasant words of Rlvana, the lord 
of Rakshasas, Sita, racked with sorrow on account of her 
husband, became terrified, like unto a she-elephant, worsted 
by a lion on the skirt of a forest. Threatened by R&vana 
and encircled by the Rakshasees, that timid damsel bewailed 
like a girl cast off in a lonely forest. “Truly the sages say 
that death in this world doth not come untimely. Or else 

• The sections 28 and 29 are not found in all the texts. They are found in 
Bengal edition. Gorressio translati s it and remarks — “I think the chapter 
XXVIII — The auspicious signs — is an addition, a later interpolation by the 
Rhapsodists. It has no bond of connection either with what precedes or follows 
it anti may be struck out without injury.” We have however thought it proper 
to give a full version. — T. 




SUiXDA RA f&NDA At. 



973 



would I have, vicious as I am, lived for a moment, being 
thus sorely threatened. Forsooth, my mind, divested of 
happiness and full of misery, is firm or else why is it not 
broken in sunder like unto the summit of a hill clapped 
by a thunderbolt. Nor am I to blame for this — I am worthy 
of being killed by this demon of uncomely presence. As a 
Brahmana cannot impart instructions in Vedas unto the people 
of other castes so I shall not confer my mind on Havana. 
If that lord of the people doth not come within the appoint- 
ed time, forsooth shall that vile lord, of the RSkshasas, mince 
my limbs with his arrows like unto a surgeon cutting off 
the limbs of an embryo.* Two months shall pass away in 
no time and I shall have to suffer the pain of death, over- 
whelmed with sorrow as I am, like unto a thief, confined in 
stocks, at the command of the sovereign to receive death the 
next morning. O Rtma ! O Lakshmana ! O Sumitra ! O Rama’s 
mother! O my mothers! I am worsted in this ocean of 
grief, like unto a bark, driven hither and thither by the 
blast, in the midst of an ocean. Verily for me, those two 
powerful, lion-like sons of the king, have been killed by 
(this demon) effulgent like the lightning and assuming the 
semblance of a deer. Unfortunate as I am, forsooth I was 
tempted then by death wearing the shape of a deer and 
thus foolishly lost RSma and Lakshmana, the sons of the 
worshipful sire. O R&ma, O thou of truthful vows, O thou 
of long arms, O thou having the countenance of a full moon ! 
O my life ! engaged as thou art in the welfare of the people, 
dost thou not perceive that I am about to be killed by the 
R&kshasas. Alas ! this my devotedness unto my husband, my 
forgiveness, my lying down on the bare earth, my observance 
of religious vows, my wife-like virtues, are lost like unto 
service done for an ungrateful wight. In vain are my 
pious rites, and in vain is my devotedness unto my 

0 This r pas sage clearly indicates that there were proficient and skilled sur- 
geons at the time when Rim ana was written. — T. 





9*74 



RlMlVAXA. 



husband — since I do not behold thee, am pale and feeble in 
thy absence and have given up all hopes of seeing thee. And 
duly satisfying thy sire's command, and returning success- 
fully from the forest, thou sli-alt fearlessly sport with many 
a damsel having large eyes. (But for me) O R&ma, I was 
for my own destruction, devoted, soul and heart, unto thee. 
Oh! fruitlesss is my asceticism and wifely virtue? Oh fie 
on me ! I shall renounce this my unfortunate life. I* desire 
to do away speedily with my being by means of poison 
or a sharp weapon. But there is no one in this city of the 
Rakshasas, who bringeth me this poison or weapon.” Bewail- 
ing thus in various accents, and remembering R&ma with 
all her heart, Sita, having her countenance dried up, and 
trembling, got at the biggest tree enveloped with flowers. 
And thinking thus, Sita, stricken with grief, took up in her 
hand, her braid of hair and thought — “I shall soon hang 
myself with this braid and reach the abode of Death. And 
that one of tender person reached the tree, and holding a 
branch, began to think of Rama, Lakshmana, and the glory 
of her race. And on her person were perceived many 
auspicious marks, well-known in the world, removing grief, 
fostering patience, and announcing the advent of future 
welfare. 



SECTION xxix. 



IjiKE unto servants waiting upon a wealthy person 
various auspicious omens waited upon Sit& of a blameless and 
comely person, racked with grief and divested of joy. And 
the large left eye of that dame having graceful hairs, having 
dark pupils, white ends and thick eyc-lashes, began to dance 
like a lotus shaken by a fish. And her beautiful, round, 
plump left hand, which, ere this, sprinkled with costly aguru 




SUNDARAKlNDAM . 



975 



and sandal, used to serve for a pillow unto R$ma, began to 
dance now again and again after a long time. And her well 
built plump left thigh, resembling the trunk of an elephant, 
dancing, announced that she would soon behold R&ma. 
And the gold-hued cloth, now covered with dust, of that 
damsel of a comely person, having teeth like pomegranate 
seeds, slipped a little off its place. And being enlivened by 
those and various other auspicious omens, she attained joy 
•like unto a seed, spoiled by the wind and the sun, growing 
afresh in the rainy season. And her countenance, having 
lips ted as Bimba fruits, beautiful eyes, eye-brows extending 
to ears, curling eye-lashes and white teeth, again appeared 
.graceful like unto the Moon released from the full grasp of 
JR&hu!* Her grief and exhaustion were removed — sorrow was 
pacified and her heart was filled with joy. And she with her 
countenance appeared beautiful like a lunar night beautified 
by the rays of the Moon. 



SECTI ON xxx. 



A.ND the powerful Hanumana, heard from the beginning 
to the end (the bewailings) of Sita, the story of Trijata’s 
<lream and the threats of the R&kshasees. And beholding the 
worshipful damsel, living in the forest of Asoka, like unto a 
celestial damsel in the garden of Nandana, the monkey- 
entered in a maze of anxious thoughts. “At length my 
watchful eyes have seen her, whom have been seeking in 
vain, the thousands and millions of the monkeys in all direc- 
tions and quarters. Truly have I seen her to-day, engaged 

* Like the Moon when full eclipse is just over — In mythology RAhu is the 
son of SinikA, a daitya, with the tail of a dragon whose head was severed from- 
his body by Vishnu, but being immortal this head and tail retained their sepa- 
rate existence and being transferred to the stellar sphere, became the authors 
of eclipses. — T. 




976 



hXmX y a Na. 



as I have been as a spy to estimate the strength of the ememy 
and am ranging secretly everywhere. I have seen minutely the 
city of the R&kshasas, and the strength of R&vana, the lord 
of R&kshasasas. It now remains to console the spouse of 
R£ma of incomparable power, and kind unto all, who panteth 
for her lord. I shall console this damsel, having the 
countenance of the full moon, who had never seen grief 
before, and who shall not soon reach its end. And if I go 
away without soothing this chaste lady, who is almost sense- 
less with grief, I shall be blamed of neglect of duty. And if 
1 go away, the royal daughter, the famed J&naki, finding no 
means of safety, shall, for certain, renounce her life. She is 
worthy of being consoled like unto the great armed (Rftma) 
having the countenance of the full-moon and anxious to 
behold SitS. It is not proper to speak before the Rftkshasas— 
What shall 1 do then ? I am in very great difficulty. If 
I do not console her at this latter end of the night, surely 
shall she renounce her life. How shall I answer Rftma, 
without consoling Sitft of comely stature, when he will 
ask me “What message from my Sitft ?’* And if I speedily 
repair hence without any information regarding Sit5, surely 
shall Kftkuthstha scorch me lifeless with the fire of his angry 
eyes. And if 1 urge my lord the king (Biveeshana) to bring 
bis hosts here for Rama, in vain shall be his toil*. And 
seizing the occasion when she shall be free from her demo- 
naic guards, I shall console her in her dire distress. And 
a puny monkey as I am, 1 shall speak in Sanskritf which men 
delight to use. And if I speak Sanskrit like a Brahmana, Sitft 
shall be terrified considering me Rftvaua. Must I therefore 
use the language of a common manj or else I shall not be able 

* For before that Sita shall renounce her life — T. 

t The language refined by the strict rules of grammar.— T, 

t This passage clearly indicates that Sanskrit if not spoken by men, and 
women of the upper classes of the time when R&mdyana was written, wa* at 
least understood by them, and was commonly spoken by men of priestly class 
and other educated persons.” — T. 





hUXDARAKlNDAM. 



977 



to console the Jam e of a blameless person. And beholding 
tny monkey shape and hearing my human language she might 
be afraid again, terrified as she had been before by the band of 
the Rtkshasas. And considering me Rtvana wearing shapes 
tot will, that large-eyed and high-minded dame, shall cry pite- 
ously for help. AndSitt making a sudden noise, those terrible 
R&kshasees resembling Death himself and armed with various 
weapons, shall at once arrive there* And thereupon casting 
their looks all around and finding me out, those highly power- 
ful and grim-visaged demons shall try to kill or catch me* 
And beholding me leap from branch to branch and trunk to 
trunk of big trees they shall be greatly alarmed. And espying 
my appearance while ranging in the forest, those Rakshasees 
greatly terrified, shall fill the wood with their wild shouts. 
And then they shall call(to their assistance) all those Raksha- 
sees engaged in guarding the abode of the lord of the 
Rtkshasas. And they, greatly agitated, shall with vehemence 
arrive here, armed with dirts, arrows, scimitirs and various 
other weapons. And being surrounded by them on ali sides, 
if I do kill that host of demons, tired, I shall not be able to 
bound over the main. And if that host of skilled demons, 
succeed in making me a captive,! too shall be in their hands 
and Siti shall remain ignorant of my object. Or the Raksha- 
sas, pernicious as they are, shall kill the daughter of Janaka, 
and there shall the great work of R&ma and Sugriva, be 
spoiled. And Jtnaki liveth in this secret place, girt by the 
ocean, guarded on all sides by the Rtkshasas, difficult of being 
got at and having all avenues to it shut up. if I am killed or 
captured by Rtkshasas in battle, i do not find any who can 
help Rtma in his enterprise. Myself killed, I do not find 
any monkey who can leap a hundred leagues across the sea. 
I am capable of destroying thousands of Rtkshasas, but I 
shall not then be able to get at the other shore of the great 
ocean. Victory or defeat is uncertain in a battle — I do not 
(therefore) like to engage in such an uncertain (act). What 



123 




978 



kImA fa Na. 



wise man merges certainty in uncertainty ? It is a great sin 
in me (I own) to talk with SitA— But she will die if I do not 
talk with her. Works, almost accomplished, when entrusted 
to an inconsiderate emissary, are generally spoiled, out of 
season and out of place, like unto darkness driven by the 
appearance of the sun. All those works, which are generally 
taken in hand after duly deliberating over their propriety and 
impropriety, are generally spoiled by those emissaries who are 
proud of their learning. What shall I do, by which my work 
is not injured,! am not blamed of foolishness and my cross- 
ing over the main doth not become fruitless ? What shall 1 do 
so that Sita might listen to me without being terrified ?” Think* 
ing over this, the intelligent HanumAn arrived at a conclusion. 
“I shall not disturb her, speaking (all on a sudden) about 
RAma of unwearied actions, dear unto her and to whom, 
she is firmly attached. Uttering the name of RAma, the 
foremost of the Ikshawkus, and of subdued soul and lauding 
his piety and fame in sweet accents, I shall so manage that 
Sita miglit hear and believe them/ 1 Beholding the spouse 
of that high-souled lord of the earth and engaging in this 
train of thoughts, HanumAn, stationed on a branch of the tret, 
spoke the following sweet words. 



SECTION X XXI. 



jVTeditatinc. thus the highly intelligent monkey spoke 
in accents, sweet and in such a tone as they might be, 
heard by Vaidehi. ‘There reigned a noble and pious king 
named Da^arathn, highly glorious amongst the Ikshawkos, 
the lord of the warrior-cars, steeds and elephants. 
Devoid of envy, high-minded, kind, having truth for Us 
prowess, the foremost of the Ikshawku race, wealthy and 
the enhancer of wealth ; gifted with royal marks ; highly j 




SUNDA RA KlNDAM . 



979 



beautiful ; the foremost of the kings ; famous all over 
the world of many oceans ; the conferrer of happiness and 
bimself happy. His eldest and most beloved son was the Moon- 
bright Rama, wise and the foremost of those who know the 
science of the bended bow. He was the protector of his own 
character, of his own kinsmen, of the whole world of creation 
and of virtue and subduer of foes. And banished by his old 
and truthful sire’s commands, that hero, along with his wife 
and brother (Lakshmana) repaired to the forest. And while 
roaming a-hunting in the forest he slew many a heroic Rak- 
shasa wearing shapes at will. And having heard of the destruc- 
tion of the Rakshasas of Janasthana and of Khara and Dushana, 
the illusive Ravana, assuming shapes at will, beguiling Rama, 
in the forest, stole away his consort — the Janaka’s daughter. 
And roaming the country around in quest of the blameless 
and worshipful Sita, Rama found a firm friend in Sugriva. 
And bringing about the destruction of V&li, Rama, the con- 
queror of others* cities, conferred the monkey-kingdom upon 
the high-souled Sugriva. And by Sugriva* s decree, thousands 
of monkeys, wearing shapes at will, have been searching that 
worshipful dame in various directions. And by Sampati’s 
counsel and for that large eyed dame, I have leapt a hundred 
leagues across the deep. I have at last got her. And such 
were the form, grace and the marks that R5ghava mentioned 
unto me.** Having said this, the foremost of the monkeys 
ceased. And greatly wondered was Sita hearing those 
words. Thereupon that timid dame, having good curling 
hair, raising up her face covered with hairs, looked up to 
the Stngshapa tree. And hearing the words of the monkey 
and casting her eyes to all directions and quarters, Sita 
attained an excess of delight, being engaged in thoughts 
concerning Rama. And looking around her aud upwards, 
she beheld,like unto the rising sun, the Wind-god*s son, gifted 
with inconceivable intellect, — the minister of the king of 
monkeys. 




980 



RlMlVANA. 



SECTION XXXII. 



beholding that tawny-colored monkey like unto a 
mass of lightnings and wearing a white cloth, hidden on the 
tree, Site's mind was greatly agitated. And she saw there 
the humble, sweet-speechcd monkey, appearing graceful like 
unto a collection of full-blown Asoka flowers and having eyes 
resembling burning gold. And observing that foremost of 
the monkeys, sitting humbly, that daughter of the king of 
Mithill, again greatly amazed, thought. — “This monkey is the 
most terrible of his race and therefore hard to be got at 
and looked at.” Thinking this she again sank in fear. And 
stricken with grief she again bewailed in piteous accents 
exclaiming, — “O Rama ! O Lakshmana !” And she wept 
silently and lowly. And then beholding that best of monkeys 
approach her humbly, the fair daughter of the Mi thill’s 
king, thought, — “Is this a dream mine eyes have seenf” 
And she again looked towards that Wind-god’s son, the 
foremost of the monkeys, the best of those gifted with 
intelligence, having a huge disfigured countenance, highly 
accomplished and wearing a dress mentioned before. Aod 
beholding him Sill was almost out of breath with fear. And 
regaining soon her sense the large-eyed damsel again thought, 
— “I have seen a very inauspicious dream to-day — to see a 
monkey in a dream is reckoned inauspicious by the sages. 
May good betide Rlma, Lakshmana and my Sire the king of 
J tnaka. It is no dream, I have not slept, worn with grief 
and trouble as I am. Apart from my lord having the counte- 
nance of the full-moon, I have no happiness. Thinking of 
Rlma always and uttering his name, each sight I see and each 
sound I hear brings him to my eye or ear. And therefore 
his form appearing in my mind is distressing me to-day, who 
am entirely sunk in his thoughts. And thinking of him 




SUN/) A RA KIND i M. 



981 

always I see him before me and hear his words. Methinks 
this is but a phantom of the mind. And thinking this I still 
behold the same. But an imaginary object can never have 
a form. And I still find a distinct form addressing me. 
Be glory to V&chaspati, Indra, the self existent BrahmH, the 
lord of fire and may they so grant that the creature who hath 
ipoken before me, be real and not imaginary.” 



SECTION x x x in. 



T HEREUPON coming down from the tree, HanumSn, the 
highly effulgent son of Wind, having a coral-red countenance 
and attired in a humble guise, approached Sila and joining 
reverentially his palms, addressed her with the following 
sweet words,— “Who art thou, O thou having eyes like lotus 
petals and wearing a soiled silken cloth, who art waiting there 
holding a branch of the tree ? Why are the tears of sorrow 
Rowing from thy eyes like unto drops of water falling from 
lotus petals ? Who art thou, O most fair of face, amongst 
the celestials, Asuras, NAgas, Gandharbas, Rakshasas, and 
Yakshas and Kinnaras ? Do the Rudra's* claim thy birth 
O thou fair damsel ? Or the swift gods who ride the storm ? 
Or the Vasus?t Thou appearest to me as of a celestial race. 
Art thou Rohini, the best and most accomplished of the 
stars, who, reft from the Moon, hath fallen down from the 
abode of the celestials ? Who art thou O blessed dame, 
O thou having blameless eyes ? Art thou, O lotus-eyed damsel, 
the blessed Arundhuti, who hath fled in wrath or jealous 
pride from the side of her lord (Vashishtha^ ? Or O lovely 

• The Rudras are manifestations of Siva. — T. 

t A kind of demi-gods of whom six are enumerated vie Dhava, Druva. 
Soma or the Moon, Vishnu, Anila or wind, Anala or fire, Prabhusa and Pra* 
»bava. — T. 





9S2 



RlMlVANA. 



damsel, who is the son, father, brother or husband gone 
from this world for whom thou art weeping ? Yet by thy 
tears and sighs, by the earth thou art treading and by calling 
on a monarch’s name it appears that thou art not a celestial.* 
But from the marks on thy person it appeareth that thou 
art either the consort or the daughter of a king. Art 
thou that Sita, I do ask thee, who had been stolen and borne 
away by Ravana from JanasthSna t May good betide thee! 
From thy wretched plight, thy unrivalled beauty and thy 
ascetic garb, thou art, I ween, for certain, the queen of Rama." 
Hearing those words of Hanumln and greatly delighted at 
Rama’s name, Vaidehi spoke unto him — “I am the daughter- 
in-law of Da^aratha, knowing his own self, the foremost of 
the kings of the world and the slayer of the enemy's host, and 
the daughter of Janaka the high-souled king of Videha. My 
name is Sita and I am the consort of the highly intelligent 
Rama. I lived twelve years in RSghava's abode, enjoying 
every earthly comfort and satisfying every desire. And 
at the beginning of the thirteenth year the king, advised by 
his priest, arranged for the installation of the descendant 
of Ikswakus (Rama) on the throne. And while the article? 
for the installation were being collected, the queen Kaikeyi 
addressed her lord saying — *1 shall not drink or eat for days 
and this shall be the end of my existence if Rima be installed. 
If thou dost not wish to falsify the vowt thou made unto 
me, O best of kings, let R&ma then repair to the forest.” 
The monarch was truthful and remembering his vow and 
hearing the unpleasant and vile words of Kaikeyi lost him- 
self (in grief). And thereupon the old king abiding by 
truth, weeping, begged of his elslest son, the kingdom. The 
graceful Rama liked his sire’s command more than the 
installation, and resolving within him, promised to obey hi* 

• The celestials never shed tears nor touch the ground when they walk.— T. 

+ This refers to the vow which Dasaratha made unto Kaikeyi at the tin* 
of the war going on between the celestials and the Asuras. — T. 




SUNDA RA KlNDA M. 



983 



words. R£ma, having truth for his prowess, never, for his 
life, takes back what he gives, never speaks an untruth and 
always speaks truth. And leaving aside his costly attire, the 
highly glorious (R&ma) renounced with all his heart the king- 
dom and gave me over to his mother. But myself wearing the 
garb of an ascetic, repaired speedily before him. Separated 
from him, 1 do not like to live even in the celestial region. 
And the great son of Sumitr£,the enhancer of friends’ joys, to 
follow his elder brother, dressed himself in bark and kusa . 
And thus abiding by our sire’s behest, and taking firm vows 
we entered a dreary forest never seen before. While that 
one, of unmitigated effulgence was thus living in the forest 
of Dandaka, 1, his consort, was stolen by the vieious-souled 
Rikshasa — Havana. He hath kindly allowed me two months’ 
respite after which 1 shall be slain. 



SECTION XXXIV. 

Hearing those words of Sits, stricken with grief, Hanu- 
m&n, the foremost of the monkeys, replied in soothing words, 
“O worshipful lady, by Rama’s decree I come as a messenger 
unto thee. He is safe and sound, O Vaidehi, and has asked 
of thy welfare. O worshipful dame, Rama, the son of 
Da 9 aratha, the master of the Vedas, and the foremost of 
those conversant with Vedas hath enquired of thy welfare. 
And the highly effulgent Lakshmana, the beloved 
follower of thy husband, worn with grief, bows his reverential 
head unto thee.” Hearing of the welfare of those two lions 
among men, the worshipful dame, with all her frame worked 
up with rapture, again spake unto Hanum&n, saying — “Verily 
the wise saw of the people appears to me to be true that 
once in a hundred years true joy appears to a living man”. 
Sit&, at that time, attained such a wonderful joy, as would 
have been acquired by her in the company (of Rima and 




9^4 



rImIfaNa. 



Lakshmana). And they confidingly conversed with each 
other. Hearing those words of Sitft,racked with sorrow, Hanu* 
man, the son of the Wind-god drew a little nearer to her. 
The more Hanum&n approached her the more Sit& suspected 
him as R&vana. “Alas ! Alas ! why have I spoken to 
him ? It is the R&vana, who hath appeared again in a new 
disguise.” And leaving off the Asoka branch, that one having 
a blameless person, overwhelmed with grief, sat down os 
the earth. In the meantime the mighty-armed monkey 
bowed unto Janaka’s daughter, but she, worked up with fear, 
did not cast again her looks towards him. And beholding 
him bow unto her, SitSL. having a moon-like countenance, 
sighing, spake unto that monkey in sweet accents — “If thou 
art that R&vana’s seif, who, changing thy shape by magic art, 
want to distress me again — ‘this thy vile deed doth not be* 
hove thee. Thou art surely that R&vana, whom I saw at 
JanasthSna, in a mendicant's guise, renouncing his own 
shape, O night-ranger, O thou wearing shapes at will! 
it doth not behove thee to distress me who am poorly and 
famished with fasts. But no, thou canst not be (the fiend) 
whom l suspect, since I have such joy from seeing thee. And 
may good betide thee if thou art R£ma’s messenger. I do 
ask thee, O foremost of monkeys, something about Rfima that 
is pleasant unto me. O monkey, do thou relate the glories 
of my dear R3ma. Thou art (thus) shaking my mind O gentle 
one, like unto water breaking down the banks of a river. 
Alas ! this dream has afforded me immense pleasure since, 
I, who have been separated from my lord for so long a time, 
have beheld this monkey sent by R&ghava. I do not sink even 
if 1 can behold in dream the heroic R&ghava along with Latah* 
mana — but dream even is jealous of my well-being. Nor 
do I regard this as dream. To behold a monkey in a dreasi 
doth not lead to prosperity— whereas I have attained it.* Or 

• Here prosperity means joy — Sita attained an immense treasure el joy 
beholding Rama's messenger — Hanumln— T. 





SOW DA RA KA XDA M 



985 

is it mental derangement ? Or have 1 been possessed by 
a devil ? Or have I run mad ? Or is it the sultry vnpour 
noating over sands and appearing at a distance like water ? 
No, it is not madness — for derangement of mind is the sign 
of madness — l have not lost sense and I do distinctly perceive 
me and the monkey.” Thinking thus in many a way and 
ascertaining the strength (of the monkey and the R&kshasa) 
Sit«L took him for the lord of the Rakshasas, wearing shapes 
at will. And having arrived at this decision, JanaJca’s daugh- 
ter — SitS, ceased from talking with that monkey. And 
apprised of Sita’s thought, Hanuman, the Wind god’s 
son, (replied) in words sweet unto her and enhancing 
her delight — "Bright as the sun that lights the sky 
and dear as the moon to every eye, he pleases all l»is subjects 
with bounties like unto those of Vaisrabana.* He is gifted 
with prowess like unto the greatly famed Vishnu, truth r ul and 
sweet-speeched like unto Vachaspati.f Graceful, grateful to 
the eye and beautiful like unto Kandarva’sJ self, he displays 
his wrath in a proper quarter — the foremost of men and of 
a mighty car. The whole world of creation (liveth safe) in 
the shadow of the arms of that high-souled one. Thou shalt 
soon see the consequences he shall reap by whom, assuming 
the shape of a dear, Raghava was taken away from the her- 
mitage and thou wert stolen away from that lonely place. 
And soon shall that powerful (hero) destroy Ravana in the 
battle, with fiery arrows, discharged angrily. I have been 
sent by him as a messenger to thee. Worn with grief in thy 
separation he hath enquired of thy welfare, as well the highly 
effulgent Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumitra’s joy, bowing 
reverentially unto thee. The king of monkey hosts, by name 
Sugriva — Kama’s friend, hath also enquired of thy welfare, 

* Another name of Kuvera, the god of gold. — T. 

f The god of speech. — T. 

t Cupid or the god of love in Hindu mythology described as the most 
beautiful of the celestials. — T. 



124 




9 86 



R AM AY ANA. 



0 worshipful dame. R5ma, Sugriva and Lakshmana, have 
thee always in their minds. Blessed are we, O Vaidehi, that 
thou dost still live, subject as thou art to the Rckkshasecs. 
Thou shalt soon behold R§ma, and Lakshmana of a mighty 
car, and Sugriva of unmitigated prowess in the midst of 
the million of monkey hosts. I am Sugriva' s minister, by 
name HanumSn. I have entered this city of Lank£ after 
crossing over the great main. And by means of my prowess 
and placing my feet on the head of the vicious-souled R&vana. 

1 have come here to see thee. I am not he (RSvana) for 
whom thou art taking me, O worshipful dame. Do thou 
renounce thy suspicion and rely on my words.” 



SECTION xxxv. | 

H EARING the tale o f Rlma from that best of monkeys. 
Vaidehi, spoke in sweet accents, soft and low, — ‘‘Where didst | 
thou meet Rama, how didst thou come to know Lakshmana? 
How did the monkeys and men meet on terms o( 
brotherhood ? Do thou again relate unto me, O monkey, the 
regal signs that deck the persons of R3ma and Lakshmant— 
and I shall then relinquish ail grief. Do thou relate unto 
me the form and grace of Rama, his thighs and arms and 
as well as those of Lakshmana.” Being thus addressed by 
Vaidehi, Hanuman, the Wind-god's son, began to give ai 
exact description of Rama. “If dost thou, by my good luck, 
O Vaidehi, O thou having eyes like lotus-petals, knowing me 
(as his messenger) ask me to describe thy lord’s person as «r8 
as that of Lakshmana, I shall relate them unto thee. Do tfcot 
hear, O large-eyed dame, what regal signs I have marked «■ 
the persons of Rama and Lakshmana. O daughter of 
Janaka, Ram i has eyes like lotus-petals and a countenaac* 
resembling the full-moon and is gifted with great beauty aid 




SUN DA R A KX ND A M. 



9*7 



goodness. In effulgence he is like the Sun., in patience 
like the earth, in intellect like Vrihaspati* and in fame like 
VSsava.t He is the protector of the world of creation and 
his own kinsmen. He follows right in all his ways and 
never swerves from his royal duties and is the slayer of foes. 
O dam*:, he upholds the dignity of the people of four-castes — 
he confers honors on the people and preserves them. He is 
worshipped by all like the Sun, observes ascetic vows, knoweth 
well the time when the saints should be honored and is 
conversant with the nature and procedure of actions. He is 
well acquainted with royal duties and abideth by the com- 
mandments of the Brahmanas — is wise, gifted with a good 
character, humble and the slayer of foes. He is the master 
of Yayur Vedas and is adored by those who are well-versed 
in Vedas — is proficient in the science of bended bow, Vedas 
and Vedangas.% He is broad-shouldered, large-armed, 
has a conch-like neck and a beautiful countenance. His 
throat is plump and his. eyes are red — and he is famed 
all over the world under the name of Rama. He has the 
voice of a bugle, is of a cool hue and highly powerful, 
has equally proportioned limbs and a green colour. His 
three limbs (thigh, fist and wrist) are hard and three 
others (brow arms and scrotum) are long; and three 
(tops of the hairs, scrotums and knee-joints) equal and 
three (navel, abdomen and breast) high. And three (the 
angles of the eyes, nails and palms) are copper-colored — 
three are cool and three (voice, navel and gait) are 
grave. His belly and throat have three folds of skin. The 
sole of the foot, the lines thereon and the nipples are 



• The god of wisdom. — T. 
t The lord of celestials. — T. 

X A sacred science considered as subordinate to and in some sense a part 
of the Vedas — six sciences come under this denomination — Siksha (pronouncia- 
tion) ; Kalpa (religious rite) Vyakarana (grammar) Chandas (prosody) Jyotish 
(astronomy) and Nirukti or explanation of difficult words. — T. 





9 88 



RAMA I'ANA. 



equally bended. His neck, eyes and back are short. Iff 
has three locks of hair on his head. He has four lines on 
his thumb indicating his proficiency in the four Veda*. 
His body is four hands tall; arms, thighs and cheeks are 
plump ; eye-brows, the hollows of the nose, eyes, ears, 
bps, nipples ; wrists, knee-joints, scrotums, hips, harnb 
feet are .all equally proportioned. Four teeth by the side 
of each row, are gifted with auspicious marks of the 
Sdstras. His gaits are like those of a lion, tiger, elephant 
or a bull. His lips and jaws are fleshy and elevated. His 
nose is long; words, countenance, nails, do«\n and skin 
are all cool ; his two arms, two little fingers, two thighs 
and two legs are long; his face, eyes, mouth tongue, 
lips; palate, nipples, nails and feet are like lotuses, hi* 
breast, forehead, neck, arms, navel feet, back and ears arc 
spacious. He is gifted with grace, fame and effulgence. 
His paternal and maternal race are pure. His armpit, 
belly, breast, nose, shoulders and forehead are high ; bis 
fingers, hairs, down, nails, skin, beard, eye-sight and 
intellect are thin and sharp. RSghava, with a due division of 
his time is engaged in acquiring piety, wealth emancipation 
and desires. He is truthful and graceful, amasses wealth 
and thereby protects his subjects. He is cognizant of the 
divisions of time and country and dear unto all. His step* 
brother Saumitri is gifted with incomparable prowess and b 
his equal in attachment, beauty and accomplishments. The 
person of that graceful one is gold-hued whereas that of the 
highly famous Rama is green. And those two lions among 
men had no other delight but seeing thee. And they 
ransacking the whole world in quest of thee met us in the 
forest. And ranging the earth for thee they beheld Sugrira, 
of comely presence, the lord of monkeys, at the foot of the 
nio.ii.t Rishvamuka covered with trees, banished by his elder 
brother and resorting there in his fear. And we were serving 
that truthful Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, driven from the 




SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



989 



kingdom by his elder brother. And beholding those two best 
of men, wearing bark and with bows in their hands, that best 
of monkeys, stricken with fear, leaped above and stationed 
himself on the crest of the hill. He then sent me to them. 
And thereupon by Sugriva's decree I, approached with 
joined palms, those two foremost of men gifted ""with beauty 
and royal marks. And they were pleased by me, being 
informed of the real facts. And then placing those two 
best of men on mv back I arrived at the top of the hill and 
communicated the truth unto the high-souled Sugriva. And 
conversing with each other those two lords of men and 
monkeys attained great delight. And they consoled each 
other narrating their respective misfortunes. And Rama 
then consoled Sugriva, driven away by his greatly powerful 
elder brother VSli on his wife's account. Thereupon 
Lakshmana related unto Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, the 
grief, of Rama of unwearied actions, in consequence of thy 
being borne away (by R5vana). And hearing Lakshmana's 
words, the lord of monkeys became pale, like unto the radiant 
Sun possessed by R&hu. And collecting all those ornaments 
which were thrown off by tbee on the earth, when thou wert 
borne away, the leaders of the monkey hosts, delighted 
brought them before Rama. But they could not make out thy 
whereabouts. And all those ornaments, which were handed 
. over to Rama, were collected by me when they fell tinkling 
on the ground, R5ma being beside himself with grief. And 
placing them on his lap, the god like R5ma bewailed in 
various accents. And they inflamed the more DScarathee's* 
grief. And being overwhelmed with grief that high-souled 
one laid himself low on the ground. And consoling him in 
various words, I raised him up again. And looking again 
and again with Saumitri, at those costly ornaments, RSghava 
handed them over to Sugriva. Raghava burns in grief, O 
worshipful dame, in thy absence, like unto a volcanic 



* Son of Dasaratha — R&ma. — T. 




990 



RAmIYANa. 



mountain burning with a perpetual fire. For thee, sleepless- 
ness, grief and anxiety are distressing R&ghava like unto 
three fires* burning down the fire temple. R&gliava is 
moved by thy separation like unto a huge mountain shaken 
by a terrible earth-quake. O daughter of a king, he is 
ranging at large in many a beautiful forest, river and 
fountain — but he finds delight nowhere. O daughter of the 
king J^naka. bringing about the destruction of R&vana, with 
all his kith and kin, Righava, the foremost of men, shall 
soon regain thee. And thus R&ma and Sugriva entered into 
a friendly covenant, to encompass Vaii's destruction and to 
institute enquiries about thee. And thereupon returning to 
Kishkindha with those two heroic princes, the lord of monkeys 
killed Vali in battle. And destroying V&li by his prowess 
in battle, Rama made Sugriva king over all monkeys and 
bears. And in this way, O dame, the alliance between Rima 
and Sugriva was made. And know me as Hanum&n, their 
messenger who hath come to thee. Regaining his own 
kingdom, Sugriva summoned all the mighty monkeys and 
despatched them in various quarters in quest of thee. And the 
highly powerful monkeys, resembling mountains, commanded 
by that lord of monkeys, proceeded to all the regions of the 
earth. And terrified by Sugriva’s decrees, those monkeys, 
since then, have been ransacking the whole earth for thee. 
And I am one of them. And the beautiful and mighty son of 
V&li, by name Angada,hath proceeded with three armies under 
him. And many were the days and nights that we spent, over- 
whelmed with grief and having lost our way on that best of 
mountains Vindhya . We gave up all our hopes for the 
accomplishment of our end and our appointed time was 
well-nigh spent. And in fear of that lord of monkeys we 
addressed ourselves to put an end to our lives. Ranging 
the mountain strongholds, rivers and fountains and not 

t The aggregate of the three fires maintained b y the Brahman bo nr 
holder. — T. 





SUNDA RA KIND A M. 



991 



finding thy reverence, we were ready to do away with our 
existence. And on the crest of that hill we took to fasting. 
And beholding those foremost of monkeys engaged in fasting 
Angada, sunk in grief, bewailed, O Vaidehi, mentioning thy 
rape, the destruction of Vkli in that way, our fastings and 
Yatayu's death. While we were thus waiting, ready for death 
and giving up all hopes for the fulfillment of our master’s be- 
hest, there appeared, as if the cause of our success, the mighty 
and powerful vulture, the brother of Yatdyu , by name Sampati. 
And hearing of the destruction of his brother, he in wrath, 
said — ‘By whom and where hath my younger brother been 
killed ? I wish to hear this from you, the foremost of 
monkeys/ And Angada related unto him verily Yatayu's 
destruction at Janasthana, for thee, by that grim-visaged 
Rakshasa. And hearing of Yatayu's death, Aruna's son 
became afflicted with sorrow and informed us, O thou exqui- 
sitely *fiue damsel, of thy stay in the abode of R&vana. And 
hearing those words of Samp&ti, enhancing our delight, we 
all, headed by Angada, left that place. And leaping from 
the crest of Vindhya mountain we reached the excellent brink 
of the Ocean. Being greatly anxious to behold thee and 
delighted, those plump monkeys headed by Angada, arrived 
at the banks of the main. And worked up .with a strong 
desire to see thee, they again engaged in anxious thought. 
And beholding the ocean, the monkey hosts lost their heart. 
And removing their fear, I leaped a hundred leagues across 
the deep and entered Lanka, at night, infested with demons. 
I have seen Ravana, and thee stricken with grief. O 
thou of a blameless person, I have related all unto thee in 
regular order. Do thou speak to me, O worshipful dame, 
I am D&9arathee’s messenger. Do thou know me as the Wind- 
god’s son, the counsellor of Sugriva, who am engaged in 
R§ma’s service and have come here for thee. It is all well 
with thy K&kuthstha, the foremost of those using weapons, 
as well as with Lakshmana, O worshipful dame, gifted with 




* 



992 RAMArANA. 

auspicious marks, engaged in the worship of his superiors 
and in the well being of thy lord. By Sugriva’s decree, 
I alone have reached here. And I, ranging alone and wear- 
ing shapes at will, have come to this Southern quarter, to 
find out thy whereabouts. By my good luck I shall be able, 
with thy news, to remove the grief of those monkey hosts 
who are lamenting for thee. By my good fortune, my cros- 
mg over the main, hath not become fruitless. I shall be 
praised there, O worshiful dame, for I have been able to see 
thee. And the highly powerful R&ghava shall soon regain 
thee, destroying, with all his sons and friends, R&vana the 
king of Rakshasas. There is a hill, O Vaidehi, named 
Maiyab&na, the foremost of all the mountains. There lives 
my father, the great monkey Kesari. Being commanded by 
the celestial ascetics, he once repaired thence to the mount 
Gokarna and at the holy watering place of. the lord of the 
rivers he brought about the destruction of (the Asura) . 
Samvasadana . O Vaidehi, I was born, on the field, of that 
monkey. And I am known all over the world as Hanum&n 
by my own actions. To create thy confidence, O Vaidehi, 

1 have related thy lord’s accomplishments. And forsooth, 
thou shah soon be taken, O worshipful dame, by R&ghava.” 
Hiving her confidence formed by these reasonings and various 
marks, SitS, worn with grief, took him lh>r R&rna’s messen- 
ger:. And J&naki attained an excess of delight and shed 
tears of joy from her eyes having curling eye-lashes. 
And the beautiful counteuance of that large-eyed dame, 
having spacious eyes, appeared like the Moon released from 
the hold of Rahu. She then took him for a real monkey 
and none else. Thereupon Hanum&n again spoke unto her, 
having a comely presence, — “I have related unto thee *U 
this. Do thou be consoled, O Maithilee 1 Tell me not, 
what am 1 to do and what dost thou like. I shall soon repsv 
hence. When the Asura Samvas&dana was destroyed in con- 
flict by that best of monkeys at the desire of the celestial 




SUN DA RA KIND A At. 



993 



ascetics, I was born of the Wind, O maithilee. I look like a 
monkey but am his equal in prowess.” 

SECTION XXXVt. 

The highly effulgent son of the Wind-god, Hanumin, 
to create Sit&'s confidence, again addressed her with the 
following words : — ‘O great dame, I am a monkey, the 
messenger of the highly intelligent R&ma. Behold this 
precious ring with R&ma’s name engraven on it, given by 
thy high-souled lord and brought as a token to create thy 
confidence. Do thou take heart and may good betide thee, 
there will be an end of thy grief soon.” And taking the 
ring that used to deck her lord’s finger and looking at it, 
J&naki seemed to have actually got her lord. And her 
graceful countenance, having large eyes, looked, with 
delight, like unto the Moon released from the possession 
of R&hu. And greatly delighted at her husband’s news 
that modest damsel, affectionately welcoming Hanuman, ap- 
plauded that great monkey — “O foremost of monkeys, thou 
art brave, powerful and wise, since thou hast alone smitten 
this abode of the Rikshasas. Thou hast, with thy laudable 
prowess, leaped, a hundred leagues, across the ocean, 
the abode of marine monsters, taking it for Goshpada * 
O foremost of monkeys, I do not consider thee as an ordi- 
nary monkey, since thou dost not care or fear R&vana. O 
best of monkeys, thou art worthy of my welcome, since 
thou hast been despatched by R&ma, knowing self. R&ma, 
hard of being got at, hath not sent thee, specially to me, 
without a trial of thy prowess. By my good luck, is it all 
well with the virtuous-souled and truthful R£ma and the 
highly powerful Lakshmana the enhancer of Sumitr&’s joy? 
And if K&kuthstha lives untouched by ill, then why does 
* A measure as much as a cow's footstep will hold. — T. 



125 




994 



RAA/A van a. 



lie not burn the earth, encircled by the ocean, with his ire like 
unto the fire of dissolution? Or they are capable of dis- 
comfiting the celestials in a battle but me-thinks by my 
ill-luck, the end of my miseries hath not arrived as yet. 
Is Rama greatly pained ? Does he grieve? Is that foremost 
of men making preparations for my rescue ? Has he forgotten 
his work being overwhelmed with fear and poorliness of 
heart ? Is that son of the king performing still his manly 
duties ? Is that slayer of foes, desirous of acquiring victorv. 
pleasing his friends still with forgiveness and gifts and 
dealing his enemies with punishment, sowing dissensions 
amongst them, and with other expedients? Is he still gaining 
friends and are friends gathering around him ? Is he welcoming 
his friends and are they honoring him the more ? Is that 
son of the king invoking the blessings of the celestials? 
Hath he attained manliness and assistance from the celestials? 
Hath Raghava lost all his affection for me for my living at- 
a distance from him ? Will he save me from this disaster? 
Hath not Rama, ever used to happiness and unused to 
misery, been enfeebled by this disaster? Is he informed 
always of the welfare of Kauslaya, Sumitri and Bharata? 
Is not Raghava, worthy of honors, beside himself with grief 
in my absence? Will not R&ma rescue met Will not 
Bharata, ever devoted to his brother, send out one Aksauhini 
of terrible soldiers under the command of his ministers for 
my rescue? Will not the graceful Sugriva, the lord of the 
monkeys come to help me with hosts of monkeys having huge 
teeth and nails ? Will not the heroic Lakshmana, the 
enhancer of Sumitr&'s joy, conversant with the use of wea- 
pons, burn down the RSkshasas with his shafts? Shall I 
not behold soon that R&vana with his kinsmen hath bees 
destroyed in battle by Rama with terrible weapons? Is not 
the gohl-hued and lotus-smelling countenance (of Rftma) 
(hied up in my absence like unto lotus dried up by the rajs 
of the sun in shallow water? Does he still hold patience 




SUN DA RA KlN DAM. 



995 



in his heart,who,renounci ng his kingdom for virtue and repair- 
ing, on foot with me even to the forest, was not stricken with 
fear and grief? His love for his mother, father or any other 
person is not greater than or equal to his love for me. O 
messenger, T shall keep my life so long I do not hear anything 
about my dear one.” Having addressed that lord of monkeys 
with these highly sound and sweet accents, that graceful 
and worshipful dame ceased, with a view to hear again from 
him pleasant tales regarding Rama. And hearing the words 
of Sita the terribly powerful Maruti, placing his joined palms 
on his head said, — “The lotus-eyed Rama doth not know that 
thou art here, and hence he hath not been able to rescue thee 
like unto Purandara regaining Sachee. And hearing about 
thee from me soon shall Raghava come assisted by a large army 
of monkeys and bears. And impedingthe course of the unagi- 
tated deep and building, by me ins of his terrible shafts, a bridge 
.across it, K&kuthstha, shall divest the city Lanka of all 
the R&kshasas. And forsooth shall Rama destroy them, even 
if the celestials, or Death himself stand in his way. O 
worshipful dame, stricken with grief in thy absence, Rama 
is restless like unto an elephant smitten by a lion. I can 
swear, O worshipful dame, by the mounts Mandara, Malaya, 
Vindya, Sumeru, Dardura and all the fruits and roots, that 
thou shalt behold like unto the rising of the full moon, the 
countenance of R5ma having beautiful eyes, graceful, 
Bimba - like lips and beautified with beautiful kundalas . 
Thou shalt soon behold, O Vaidehi, Rama, on the 
mount Prasravana, like unto the performer of hundred 
sacrifices seated on the back of the elephant (Airavata ) . 
Raghava doth not take meat nor drink honey — he takes 
every day in the evening boiled rice and such wild fruits 
as are sanctioned by the Sastras . His heart is so much 
attached unto thee, that he does not drive away even flies, 
insects and snakes from his body. Rama is always engaged 
in meditations, overwhelmed with grief, and he has 




996 



RlMlVANA. 



no other thought but seeing thee. Rlma hath no sleep and 
even when asleep that best of men awakes exclaiming in sweet 
accents, *0 Sita !\ He always welcomes thee sighing and say- 
ing “O my dear love whenever he beholds any fruit, flower 
or any object liked by the ladies. O worshipful dame, he is 
always lamenting, exclaiming ‘O Sitl V and that high-souled 
son of the king, to regain thee, hath resorted to ascetic 
observances.” On hearing about Rlma, Sita was greatly 
delighted and she was equally grieved on hearing of his 
sorrow. And it appeared like the rising of the moon and 
the appearance of the clouds at the same time in an autumnal 
night. 



SECTION XXXVII. 



Hearing those words, Siti having a moon-like counte- 
nance, again spoke unto Hanumln, words, sound and pious:— 
“O monkey, what thou hast said that Rlma is not attached 
unto any other thing and is worn with grief,is like nectar mixed 
with poison. Whether in the enjoyment of vast riches, or 
emerged in the abyss of miseries, Death is pulling a man, 
binding him roughly with a chord. O best of monkeys, people 
cannot thwart the course of destiny. Behold me, Rlma and 
Saumitri, therefore sunk in miseries. I do not know when 
shall Rlghava get at the other end of the ocean of grief, 
by displaying his prowess, like unto one, swimming across 
the ocean when the boat is sunk. ! do not know when shall 
my lord see me, destroying the RUkshasas, killing Rlrana 
and devastating the city of Lankl. Do thou tell him to 
come before this year expires for till then I shall live. 
This is the tenth month and two months still rentals, 
O monkey and that is the time appointed by the 
cruel R&vana. He was entreated very much by hb 




sundarakAxdam 



99 7 



brother Bivishana to restore me but he paid no need to 
his requests. Rlvana doth not desire to restore me (unto 
R&ma) for he has been brought under the influence of 
Death who is seeking him in battle. Bivishana 's eldest 
daughter, 0 monkey, by name KalS, hath related this unto 
me, being appointed by her mother. There is a leading, 
steady, old, intelligent and educated Rakshasa, gifted with a 
good character, named Abindhya and highly respected of 
R&vana who told him that the destruction of the RSkshasa race 
would proceed from RSma, but the vicious-souled one paid 
no attention to his well-meaning words. I hope, O foremost 
of monkeys, that my husband shall soon regain me for pure 
is my soul and he is gifted with many accomplishments. 
Rlghava hath in him, O monkey, energy, manliness, strength, 
kindness, gratitude and prowess. He brought about without 
his brother’s aid, the destruction of the fourteen thousand 
Rakshasas at Janasth&na. What enemy is not troubled at 
this f The disaster-creating Rakshasas can never be com- 
pared with that best of men. I am cognizant of his prowess 
as Sachee is of lndra’s. O monkey, RSma the Sun, with 
his arrow-like rays, shall dry up the water — the inimical 
R&kshasas.” Saying this she was overwhelmed with grief 
on R&ma’s account, and Hanuman again spoke unto her 
having her countenance bathed in tears, — “No sooner shall 
Righnva hear from me than he shall speedily repair hither 
followed by a huge army of monkeys and bears. Or I shall 
release thee even to-day from the grasp of that RSkshasa 
and these miseries. Do thou place thyself on my back, O thou 
of a blameless person. And having thee on my back I shall 
leap over the main. I am capable of carrying the 
city of Lank& even with R&vana. I shall restore thee to-day, 
O Maithili, unto R&ghava on the mount Prasravana, like unto 
fire carrying unto Indra, the sacrificial offerings. Thou shalt 
behold to-day, O Vaidehi, R&ma along with Lakshmana, 
making preparations (for the destruction of his enemy) like 




993 



RAjl/A van a. 



unto Visnu, engaged in the destruction of (lemons. (And 
thou shalt observe) that highly powerful one, anxious to 
behold thee and seated like unto Purandara on the summit 
of that foremost of mountains. Do thou place thyself on 
my back, O worshipful dame, do thou not neglect it, O beau- 
tiful lady, and be thus reconciled unto R&ma like unto Rohini 
restore d to the Moon. By the time, that we will take in 
talking thus, thou shalt reach R&ma like Rohini restored to 
the Moon. Do thou therefore place thyself on my back and 
I shall cross the ocean sailing by the aetherial way. O fair 
one, carrying thee from this place, none amongst the inhabi- 
tants of Lank& shall be able to follow me. In the same way 
I have come here I shall return by the welkin, O Vaidehi 
placing thee on my back.” Hearing those surprising words 
from that best of monkeys, Maithilee, having her entire frame 
worked up with joy, again bespake Hanum&n — “Hanum&n, 
how darest thou take me to such a long distance ? O lord 
of monkey hosts, this attests to thy monkey hood. O fore- 
most of monkeys, little-bodied as thou art, how dost thou 
desire, to take me hence to my husband the lord of men ?” 
Hearing the words of Sita, the graceful son of the Wind-god 
Hanum&n reflected aside — “This is my first insult. The 
lotus-eyed dame is not cognizant of my prowess or strength. 
Vaidehi should therefore learn that I can assume shapes at 
will.” Thinking thus, Hanum&n, the foremost of the monkeys 
and the slayer of foes, showed himself unto Sit&, in his true 
shape. And leaping down from the tree, that best of mon- 
keys began to increase himself to create Sil&'s confidence. 
His person appeared like the hill Mand&ra and the flaming 
fire. And that best of monkeys having a copper-colored 
countenance, thunder-like nails and teeth and mountain-like 
huge body, appeared before SH& and said—* “I am capable 
of carrying this Lank& with her lord, the mountains, forests 
gardens, buildings, walls and gate-ways. Do thou therefore 
confide in me, O worshipful dame, and be not suspicion* 




SUM/) A RA KIND AM. 



999 



And O Vaidehi, do thou remove Rama’s grief as well as 
Lakshinana’s.” Beholding the Wind-god’s own begotten 
son,Hatium&n, resembling a huge mountain, Sita, the daughter 
of Janaka, having eyes resembling lotus-petals, said, — “0 
great monkey, I know thy strength and bravery, thy air-like 
motion and thy wonderful fire-like energy. What ordinary 
man can come here crossing the incomparable ocean. O 
lord of monkey hosts, I understand that thou art capable 
of returning and thou shalt be able to carry me. But I 
should consider now how the work might be accomplished. 

0 foremost of monkeys, I should not go with thee. Perhaps 

1 might lose my sense with thy air-like velocity. When 

moving terribly thou shalt proceed high up in the welkin, 
perhaps I shall then fall down. No* sooner I shall fall down 
into the ocean infested with fish and other animals than I 
shall be an excellent food unto them. O slayer of foes, I 
shall not be able to accompany thee. For seeing thee carry 
a woman- they shall surely suspect thee. And finding me 
stolen, those terribly powerful Rakshasas commanded by the 
vicious-souled R&vana, shall follow thee. O hero, carrying 
me and encircled by those heroic Rakshasas with maces and 
darts in their hands, thou shalt be beset with dangers. 
And on the sky the Rakshasas shall be armed with 

weapons and thou shalt be without any. How shalt 

thou be able to fight and protect me at the same time. 
And when thou shalt be engaged in conflict with those 
Rakshasas of terrible deeds, I, O foremost of monkeys, 
stricken with fear, shall fall down from thy back. O fore- 
most of monkeys those terrible and powerful Rakshasas 
shall be able to defeat thee a little. And when thou shalt 
be defeated in battle I shall fall down and those 

vicious R&kshasas shall carry me away from thy 

hands or destroy me. Victory or defeat is uncertain in a 
battle. I shall thus be distressed by those K&kshasas setting 
up terrible roars and thy endeavours shall be fruitless, O best 




IOOO 



rAmA van a. 



of monkeys. Thou art capable of destroying the R&kslusts 
very easily (I admit) — but Rftma’s fame shall then be soiled 
if dost thou bring about their destruction. Or the R&kshasas 
taking me away shall keep me in such a secret place, that 
neither the monkeys nor Rftghava shall be able to ascertain 
my whereabouts. And all thy preparations for n.e shall thus 
be useless. And mighty shall be the result of R&ma’s coming 
with thee. O large armed one, the life of Rftghava of unmiti- 
gated prowess, those of his brothers and of thy royal race 
are all subject to me. And when they shall give up their 
hopes of releasing me, they, worn out with grief and anxiety 
shall renounce their lives along with the monkeys and bears. 

0 monkey, being guided by my love for my husband, I do not 
like willingly to touch any body’s person but Rima’s. When 
Havana, by force touched my person, I had no other help, for 

1 was then without my lord and therefore was subject to 
another person. If kftma can take me away from here, des- 
troying the Ten-necked one with all the R&kshasas— -he shall 
then perform the worthy action. I have heard of and myself 
seen the prowess of the highly-souled (Rftma) unconquerable 
in a battle. There is none amongst the celestials, Gandharbas, 
Nagas and the Rftkshasas who can match him in a conflict 
Beholding that highly powerful Rftghava, in a couflict, like 
unto Vftsava in prowess, holding a wonderful bow and 
followed by Lakshmana, who can withstand his prowess 
resembling the flaming fire ? O foremost of monkeys, who 
can withstand Rftghava in a conflict, followed by Laksh- 
mana moving like an infuriated elephant and showeriog 
shafts like unto the rays of the sun at the time of Dissols- 
lion ? O best of monkeys do thou speedily bring here my 
dear one along with Lakshmana and the lord of monkey hosts. 
O heroic monkey, do thou soon satisfy me, who am stricken 
witli grief in consequence of my long separation from Riaa. 




SUNDARA KIND A U. 



IOOI 



SECTION XXXVIII. 



jr£ HARING those words, that foremost of monkeys, skilled 
in speech, was greatly delighted and again addressed 
Sit& in the following words,— ,c O worshipful lady, O thou 
of an auspicious presence, what thou hast said, speaks well 
for a feminine nature and the modesty of a chaste damsel. 
And because thou art a female, thou art not capable of 
Crossing on my back, the main extending over a thousand 
leagues. The second argument — I shall not touch any 
other person’s body than R&ma's, which thou hast produced, 
O Jftnaki 1 O fhou gifted with modesty \ truly becometh thee, 
who art the spouse of that high-souled one. Who else than 
thee, O worshipful one, can give expression to such words ? 
Truly shall K&kutstha hear from the beginning to the end, 
O worshipful dame, of thy actions before me, and all thou 
hast said. For many reasons, I gave vent to such words, 
O lady,— I am anxious to compass R&ma’s end, and my 
heart is melted with affection. It is very difficult to enter 
this city of Lank£, it is equally hard to cross over the main 
—but I am capable of doing all these, and hence I gave 
utterance to all those words. I wish to take thee even to- 
day to the descendant of Raghu. It is for my devotion 
unto him and regard for thee that I said so and for nothing 
else. If thou dost not wish to go with me, O thou of a blame- 
less person, do thou give me such a token as might create 
R&ghava’s confidence.” Being thus accosted by Hanum&n, 
Situ resembling the daughter of a celestial, spoke, gently, words 
With their letters strung on the vapour of grief,— 1 “Do thou 
mention unto my dear lord (in my words) what had happened 
unto me while living in the hermitage at the foot of the mount 
Pratyanga t situate on the north-east of Chitrakuta, abounding 
n roots, fruits &nd water. ‘At no distance from that place fre- 

126 




1003 



R&BikrdNA. 



quented by the ascetics flowed the sac Mandikini. 

While ranging in that woodland fragrant with the odour of 
many flowers, thou, having thy person wet in consequence 
of thy sport in the water, didst sit on my lap. A crow, at 
that time, longing to feed en my flesh, tore my breast with 
its beak. And I threatened it with a pebble. But it coo* 
tinued tearing my breast as if it sat there to feed on my 
flesh and therefore did not fly off. Being enraged with that 
bird, as I tried to tighten the cloth around my waist, it gave 
way a little, and thou, rising up from thy seat and looking at 
me, didst laugh over it And I was greatly eoraged with 
thy laughter and ashamed, and, being wounded by the crow, 
1 approached thee. Thereupon, tired as 1 was, I sat on thy 
lap, and, exercised with ire, I was consoled by thee laughing. 
Now I, having my countenance bathed in tears, gently 
rubbed my eyes. And 1 was seen by thee, O my lord, in that 
wise, greatly enraged with the crow. O Rftghava, I slept 
for sometime, at thy lap, out of exhaustion, and thyself 
in turn, slept at mine, O elder brother of Bharata. la 
the meantime, that crow again suddenly approaching, 
tore my breast with its beak, as I awoke and was 
rising up from thy lap, O Rlghava.’ Thereupon Rlghava 
awoke with the shedding of blood. Beholding ay. bread 
wounded, that larged-armed hero wroth like a serpent, sigh* 
ing, said, — O thou having thighs like the trunk of aa 
elephant, by whom hath thy breast been wounded ? Whs 
wants to play with an angry five-hooded serpent?— Thereupon, 
casting his looks around, he espied the crow, sitting ia my 
front with its claws besmeared with blood. That cmt 
best of birds, was the son of the lord of the rrlrsliall 
in disguise. And gifted with air-like velocity, he. ■pendij 
entered inside the earth. Thereupon that la rg e f d 
hero, best of the intelligent, with his eyes whiriiqgwih 
ire, resolved to destroy that crow. And taking a blade of JGgi 
off his seat, he tied it to a Brahma weapon.. And thd 




SUNDA RA KIND A M. 



*003 



blade, facing the bird, appeared with its flaming face, like 
the fire that would destroy the world. And he hurled that 
burning blade at the crow. And it pursued the crow high 
up in the welkin. Being thus pursued, that crow, in order 
to save himself, traversed various regions. And being 
then renounced by his father (Indra) and the great ascetics, 
he, ranging the three worlds, at last resorted to his (R&ma’s) 
shelter. And, placing himself on the earth, he sought his 
shelter, and K&kutstha, out of mercy, saved him, albeit 
worthy . of being killed. And he spoke unto him, greatly 
famished, of a pale countenance and lying on the earth,— It is 
impossible to render this Brahma weapon fruitless. There- 
fore, do thou speak (as to what is to be done.) — He then 
destroyed the right eye of the crow. Having given ■ up his 
eye, he saved himself. Then bowing unto Rama as well 
as king Da$aratha, the crow, liberated by that hero, went 
to his own abode. ‘Thou hadst on my behalf discharged 
the Brahma weapon even at a crow. Why then, O lord 
of earth, dost thou forbear him who had carried me off from 
thee ? O foremost of men, do thou dispense unto me thy 
kindness capable of inspiring hope. O lord, possessing a 
lord in thee, I (now) appear as if I had none. That kind- 
ness is a prime virtue — I have heard even from thee ; and I 
know that thou art exceedingly energetic and possessed of 
great strength and high courage, — unfettered by Consider- 
ations of time and space, incapable of being agitated, thou in 
gravity resemblest the ocean, and like unto that lord of the 
earth furnished with seas— V&sava. O Rfghava, being thus 
the foremost of those acquainted with weapons, powerful, 
and possessed of strength, wherefore dost thou not direct 
thy weapon against the R&kshasas’ f Neither Ndgas, nor 
Gandbarbas, nor the gods, nor the Maruts, are competent to 
resist the onset of Rima in battle. If that puissant one still 
retains any regard for me, why doth he not by means of sharp- 
ened shafts make root and branch work with the Rftkshasas f 




1004 



RlMlFANA. 



And why, taking the permission of his brother, that repressor 
of foes, the heroic Lakshmana gifted with great strength, doth 
not deliver me ? If those foremost of men be indeed equal 
to Indra and the Wind, and incapable of being repressed 
even by the celestials, wherefore do they disregard me? 
Surely I must be guilty of some great crime, since although 
capable, those subduers of enemies do not look at me. f 
Hearing Vaidehi’s piteous words uttered with tearful eyes, 
that leader of monkey-bands, the exceedingly energetic 
Hanum&n, said, — “O exalted one, I swear by truth, Rima 
turneth away his countenance (from every work) in conse- 
quence of grief for thee. And R&tna being seized with 
sorrow, Lakshmana burns in grief. Now that I have been 
able to obtain a sight of thee, this is no season for sorrow. 
O auspicious one, even now thou shalt witness the end of 
this woe. Filled with hope from my sight of thee, those 
foremost of persons, those mighty princes, shall reduce the 
worlds to ashes. And, O thou of expansive eyes, slaying 
in battle the wicked R&vana with his allies, R&ghava shall 
take thee back to his palace. Now tell me what I shall 
communicate unto R&ghava, and the highly powerful 
Lakshmana, and the energetic Sugriva, and all the assembled 
monkeys .’ 1 Thus addressed, Sit& again spoke unto him, 
saying,— Do thou on my behalf, bowing down the head,enquiie 
after the welfare of that protector of men whom Kaucaly& hath 
brought forth. Do thou on my behalf, and on account of 
my words, enquire after the welfare of him, who, renouncing 
wreaths and gems of all kinds, and beloved damsels possessed 
of transcendent beauty, and wealth such as is difficult to 
obtain on this spacious earth ; and who, honoring and bowing 
unto his father and mother, followed R&ma, — in whom 
Sumitra hath an excellent son,— of that righteous one, who, 
espousing the cause of his brother, renouncing choice 
happiness, followeth his brother to the forest, ministering 
unto him ; who is lion-shouldered, long-armed, intelligent, 




SUN DA RA RlNDA M. 



1005 



isd of a prepossessing presence ; who beareth himself to- 
wards Rftma as if he were bis sire, and towards me, as if I 
were his mother ; of that heroic Lakshmana who did not 
know when I was ravished away ; — the servant of the elders, 
crowned with auspiciousness,— -who is competent and reineth 
in his tongue ; who is the foremost of those dear unto the 
king's son,* and worthy of my father-in-law ; who is dearer 
[unto Rftma) than even my own self ; of Lakshmana, brother 
into Rftma ; that energetic one who undertaketh even such 
tusks as he is not equal to, and seeing whom Rftghava hath 
forgotten his deceased siret,— *him for the sake of my words, 
thou must ask as to his welfare. Lakshmana is always mild 
and* pure, and dear unto Rftma. Do thou speak to him so, 
that, O best of monkeys, he may remove my miseries. O 
leader of monkey-bands, do thou bring about success on this 
undertaking. From this preliminary endeavour of thine, 
Rftghava shall take pains on my behalf.— This also shalt thou 
say again and again unto that hero— my lord,— *0 son of 
Da^aratha, I shall keep on this life for another month ; and 
this I swear unto thee by truth that I will not live beyond 
this month. O hero, even as Vishnu rescued Kanfiki from 
the nether regions , % it behoveth thee to rescue me, who have 
ignominiously been confined by the impious Rftvana."— 
Thereupon, saying,—' “Hand this unto Rftghava," Sftft gave 
to Hanumftn a noble and excellent jewel for the head§, 
which was tied up in her attire. Then taking that 
best of gems, the hero tried to fix it on his finger ; but 



* Rftma. 

t In consequence of the fatherly care of Lakshmana. — T. 

t According to Kataka, Kanfiki is Earth, who was rescued by Nftrftyana 
from the subterranean regions. According to Tirtha, Kau$iki is India’s Aos- 
picionsness, who on the occasion of the destruction of the Asura, Vritra, took 
refuge in the nether regions, and was brought back by Vishnu.— T. 

$ Chuddmoni. According to tba commentator, the word means a gmn 
worn in the bead.— T. 




ioo6 



klUlrANA. 



it did not enter into it* And taking the gem, and bowing 
unto Sita and going round her, that foremost of monkeys 
remained by her side in humble guise. And experiencing 
rapture in consequence of his seeing SitB, he mentally 
presented himself before RSma, and Lakshmana graced with 
auspicious marks. And taking that costly and superb gem, 
which by virtue of some power, king Janalca’s daughter had 
managed to hide (from the gaze of the Rlksbasis), Hanuuln, 
feeling delighted like one, shaken by the wind blowing on 
the top of the foremost of mountains, and then getting away 
from it, prepared to set out 



8ECTION XXXIX. 



Having made over the gem, Sit& said unto Hanumln,— 
'This sign is very well known to R&ma. Seeing this gem, 
that hero, R&ma, shall recollect three persons,— his mother, 
myself, and king Dafaratha, Thou, O- foremost of monkeys, 
wilt again be commissioned on this business. Do then 
bethink thee as to what thou wilt do afterwards; when thou 
hast been entrusted with this task. O foremost of monkeys 
thou art capable of compassing this work. Therefore, think 
as to what course of his (R&ma’s) shall remove (my) misery. 
O HanumSn, undergoing toils, be thou instrumental is 
removing my misery.” Saying, "So be it," the Wind-god's 
offspring of terrible prowess, bowing down the head, prepar- 
ed to depart. Seeing that (Hanum&n) was about to set oOf, 
that exalted one, Mithil&’s daughter, addressed that monkey, 
son unto the Wind-god, in words choked by the vapoer of 
grief, — “O Hanum&n, do thou communicate good nears ts 
both R&ma and Lakshmana, to Sugriva with his counsellors,' 

• Another meaning it, — “But fearing discovery no account of the MtttMi 
of the jewel, he desisted.”— T. 





SONDA RA KIND AM. 



1007 



•lid to all the aged monkeys. And, O best of monkeys, in 
consonance with righteousness, communicate good tidings 
j[uuto Rftma). And it behoveth thee to strive so that the 
mighty-armed Rftghava may rescue me from this sea of 
sorrow. And, O Hanumln, do thou speak so that the illus- 
trious Rftma may deliver me while I am still alive; and 
thereby do. thou * reap righteousness. Ever breathing high 
spirits, Dftcarathi,* hearing my words, shall attain an access 
pi manliness for my deliverance. Soon as Rftghava shall hear 
words couching tidings of me, that hero shall duly resolve 
on displaying his prowess.” Hearing this speech of Sitft, 
Hanumftn, son unto the Wind-god, with his joined hands 
raised to his head, said,— 1 ‘Soon shall K&kutstha come, 
surrounded by the foremost monkeys and bears ; and, van- 
quishing the foe in fight, shall remove thy grief. Find 1 
none either among men, or Asuras, or celestials, that dares 
remain before him as he discharges his shafts. For thee, in 
especial, be can stand in conflict even the Sun, Indra, 
nay— Yarns himself, that offspring of the Sun. For thee, he 
preparetb himself . to conquer the Earth bounded by the 
main ; and victory, thou daughter of Janaka, shall be Rama's.” 
Hearing his words excellently spoken and thoroughly true, 
Jftnaki honored them highly, and spoke (as follows). And 
gazing at him once and again as he prepared to go away, 
Sitft from affection . honored the speech which had been 
uttered (by Hanumftn) out of attachment unto his master,— 
“If thou wish it, O hero, do thou, O subduer of enemies, stay 
here for one day. Having rested in some hidden nook, thou 
wilt depart to-morrow. O monkey, (if thou dost remain), 
tby vicinity shall for a moment remove the huge grief of 
me of slender luck. But even if thou go (passing to-day 
here), I have, O tiger-like monkey, doubts as to thy return ; 
and, accordingly, doubt, certainly, as to my life. And the 
grief incident to my not seeing thee shall burn me greatly, 



. 0 Da$aratba*s son.*— T 





i oo 8 



RlMlFANA. 



even, O monkey, as grief barneth one that is already 
consumed by sorrow over and over again. And, O hero, 
O lord of monkeys, this doubt is also before me. How, 
alas ! shall the mighty lord of monkeys, albeit backed 
by the monkeys and bears, cross over the mighty main hard 
to cross, — and (how shall) those forces consisting of bears and 
monkeys or those sons of the best of men (cross over the 
same) ? In all the three worlds, Vinati’s offspring, thyself, 
and the Wind-god, have alone the power of crossing over the 
deep. — Then, for the accomplishment of this work, difficult to 
compass, what, O hero, O thou best of those conversant with 
business, what way dost thou see as to its success ? Or tbou 
alone, O destroyer of hostile heroes, art quite enough for the 
fulfilment of this purpose ; and thou shalt reap, in the shape 
of fame, the fruit of thy achievement But if (Rima) himself 
together with all his forces, conquering Rtvana and (recover- 
ing me) in battle, returned victorious to his own city,— this 
would be worthy of himself. If blocking up Lank! with bis 
army, that afHictor of hostile hosts, Kikutstba took me 
(hence), that would be worthy of him. Do thou, therefoie, 
adopt such means that the high-souled heroic warrior may 
have an opportunity of putting forth prowess Hearing 
those words fraught with sense and reason and informed with 
affection, HanumSn,by way of reply said mildly/— “O revered 
lady, that foremost of monkeys— the lord of bears and mon- 
keys — Sugriva, possessed of truth, bath made up his mind os 
thy behalf. That destroyer of Rhksbasas, O daughter ef 
Videha, environed by thousands of millions of monkeys, 
will come hither without delay. And exceedingly powerfid 
and mighty monkeys possessed of prowess, and speeding far 
with the rapidity of thought, are in his command. Nothing 
can impede their courses, either upward, or downward, or 
tending in both directions ; and those ones of measureless 
energy never experience depression in the most atriums 
undertakings. Braced by their exalted spirits, these, resort- 




SLNDARAKInDAM. 



IOO} 



tag to the aerial way, have many a time and oft circumambu- 
lated the Earth containing mountains and meads. There 
are (in that army) rangers of woods, some equal and some 
superior to me. And near Sugriva there are none who are 
inferior to me. And since even I have reached this place, what 
Shall I say of those ones endowed with immense might ? Nor 
are superior (monkeys) sent on errands ; it is only the infers 
or ones that are sent Then, O exalted one, thou needst 
not grieve : let thy sorrow depart. Those leaders of monkey- 
herds will come to Lank& by one bound ; and, like unto 
the risen Sun and Moon, those leonine men, having large 
numbers to back them, will come to thy side, riding my back. 
Those heroes and foremost of men, R&ma and Lakshmana 
both, coming to the city of Lank&, shall destroy her by means 
of their shafts. And slaying R&vana together with his 
adherents, Raghu’s son, taking thee, O paragon among 
women, shall return to his own city. Therefore, do thou take 
heart, good betide thee ! Do thou remain, eagerly wishing 
for the time. It will not be long before thou shalt behold 
R&ma resembling flaming fire. On the lord of RStkshasas 
being slain along with his counsellors and friends, thou 
shalt meet with R&ma, even as Rohini meeteth with the 
Moon. O worshipful one, speedily shalt thou behold the 
other shore of thy misery, O Maithili ; and thou shalt see 
Rivana slain by R&ma by might of arm. 11 Having thus 
solaced Videha’s daughter, Hanum&n,son unto the Wind-god, 
again spoke unto Vaidehi, saying, — “Soon shalt thou behold 
that destroyer of foes, R&ghava of subdued soul, and the 
bow-bearing Lakshmana also, come to the gate of LankS. 
And soon shalt thou behold the assembled heroic monkeys, 
endowed with the prowess of lions and tigers, and the splen- 
dour of the monarch of monkeys, and having nails and teeth 
for their arms. And thou shalt, O noble one, behold innumer- 
able companies of choice monkeys, resembling hills and 
.clouds,— -roaring on the plateaus of Malaya in Lanki. 



127 




lOIO 



RlMlFANA. 



Like an elephant tormented by a lion, R&ma afflicted in the 
vitala by the dreadful shafts of Mamnatha, doth not attain 
ease. Do not weep, exalted one, in sorrow. Let not fear 
take possession of thy heart I Even as Sachi meeteth with 
Sakra, shalt thou, O auspicious one, meet with thy lord. 
Who is greater than R&ma ? And who is equal to Saumitri ?* 
And these brothers resembling Fire and the Wind, are thy 
help. O revered one, thou wilt not have to dwell long in 
this extremely dreadful place inhabited by the RUcshasas. 
The arrival of thy beloved one is not distant. Just remain 
expecting (as best thou may), during the time that elapses 
between this and my meeting with R&ma.” 



8ECTION XL. 



H earing the speech of the high-souled offspring of the 
Wind-god, Sit& resembling a daughter of the celestials, said 
in words fraught with her welfare,—' “Even as the Earth 
with corn half-way towards harvest is gladdened on receipt 
of showers, have I, O monkey, been gladdened on seeing 
thee that speakest sweetly. Do thou so dispense thy 
kindness unto me that, with my desire attained, I may touch 
that tiger-like one with my body reduced by grief. And, 
O foremost of monkeys, preseut this sign unto Slaa, 
and tell him also for a sign that he had in ire hurled the 
dart which destroyed a single eye of the crow. And teH 
him also,f — *On my (first) tilaka having been wiped out, 
thou didst paint beside my cheek another made of red arsenic 
—this thou shouldst remember. Why, O thou endowed 
with prowess, resembling Indra the Great or VarniUb deft 
thou disregard the ravished Sitft, sitting io .the midst sf 

• i. #. Sumitri’s too, Laksknun*.— »T. 

f Sitl wish#* Hantunh to an her oiro hmfiugt to Rim.— T. 




sundarakAndam. 



ioii 



Rakshas ? This jewel for the head 1 had preserved with 
tare. In my-- misfortune, O sinless one, I used to inspire 
cheerfulness by a sight of this, resembling thyself. This 
graceful water-sprung (gem) I part from. Hereafter, over- 
whelmed with grief, I shall not be able to live. For thee 
only do I bear insufferable miseries, heart-cleaving speech, 
and companionship with R&kshasas. O destroyer of enemies, 
for a month longer will I maintain being. Beyond that, 
O king’s son, bereft of thee, I will not live. This Rlkshasa 
king is dreadful. (This being so), if I hear thee tarrying, I 
would not live for a moment.”' Hearing Vaidehi's speech 
pathetic and uttered with tears,the highly energetic Hanumin, 
son unto the Wind-god, said, — “My revered one, I swear unto 
thee by truth itself that R£ma neglecteth every business 
because of grief for thee. And R&ma being overwhelmed 
with woe, Lakshmana burneth in grief. Now that I have 
succeeded in seeing thee after no end of ado, this is no time 
for lamentation. O fair one, this very moment thou shalt 
witness the end of thy woe. Those blameless princes— 
foremost of men, gathering courage from my sight of thee, 
shall reduce Lank& to ashes. And, O thou of expansive 
eyes, slaying in battle RSLvana along with his friends, Raghu's, 
sons shill take thee back to their own palace. Now, O 
faultless lady, thou ought to give me such a sign as R&ma 
shall certainly recognise, and as shall more please him by 
far.” “Ah \ rt (answered Sit ft), “I have already furnished 
thee with an excellent sign. This ornament, O HanumSn, 
when carefully examined by R&ma, O hero, shall render 
thy words credible.” Thereupon, taking that best of gems, 
that graceful foremost of monkeys, bowing down the head 
unto that exalted one, prepared to depart. Seeing that 
monkey-leader intent upon leaping up, and surcharged 
with energy,— with his person enlarged, Janaka’s daughter, 
with a tearful countenance, spake in woe-begone guise, 
her accents choked with the vapour of grief, — “O Hanum&n, 




/OjUiFAfU 



reft 

communicate tidings of my good health onto those lion-like 
brothers, Rftma and Lakshmana, to Sugriva along with his 
counsellors, and to all (the monkeys). And it behoveth 
thee so to compass things that the mighty-armed Rgghava 
may rescue me from this sea of sorrow. Do thou, going 
to Rama, make known to him the fierce current of my grief, 
as well as the railing of these Rlk sh asas. Good fortune be 
tliy portion, thou exceedingly heroic monkey I" Thus 
furnished with the intentions of the princess, the monkey, 
having gained his object, and, growing exceedingly exhila- 
rated in his heart, reviewed the small work that yet remained 
for him, became bent upon proceeding to the north. 



SECTION XLI. 



R aving been honored by her (SitA) in excellent words, 
the monkey proceeding, left that place, thinking^-" A email 
work it is that remains. Beheld have 1 thin dark-eyed by- 
passing by three means, 1 see that I shell have tt assort 
to the fourth. No treaty with Rakshaa can answer the end* 
Neither can gifts prevail with the wealthy. Nor b it popeibk 
to sow dissensions among persons propd of their atrecgtk 
Then, display of prowess appeareth to me applicable in this 
case. Without resorting to prowess, way find I none bt 
ensuring success in this matter. If the Rakshaa find their 
foremost heroes fallen in battle, they may teaser their 
(martial ardour). He that, having compassed bis (principal) 
purpose, accomplishes many more without waning fin 
prime one, is entitled to act He that death a email mk 
is certainly not a worker,— he it is that kooweth to fasbl 
about success in diverse ways, is alone capable of aecnrieg 




SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



lOlJ 



tlit same.* Although my sole commission was to effect 
this much,t yet if I repair to the abode of the lord of 
monkeys after having ascertained the strength of our 
ownselves and that of the foe in the field, then I shall have 
done the mandate of my master. How can my arrival (at 
this place) be made to bring forth good fruit ? How can I 
forcibly bring on engagement with the RSkshasas ? And 
how can the Ten-necked one in battle be made to form a just 
estimate of the respective strength of myself and his 
forces ? Coming in contact with the Ten-necked one, 
with his three orders, forces and charioteers, I shall, reading 
the intention that is in his heart, as well as his strength, 
•—happily return from hence. This grove of the fell (fiend) 
resembling Nandana itself, containing various trees and 
plants, and captivating to eye and heart,-— will I destroy ; 
even as fire destroyeth a dry wood. This grove being ravaged, 
R&vana shall get into a fury. Then the R&kshasa monarch 
shall summon up an army consisting of horses, elephants, 
and mighty cars, equipped with tridents, iron axes and 
other arms,—, and mighty shall be the encounter that shall 
take place. And I with unimpaired prowess battling with 
those terrific Rakshas, and annihilating that host despatched 
by R&vana, shall merrily journey to the abode of the monkey- 
king.' 9 Then furious like the Wind, the offspring of the 
Wind-god possessed of dreadful prowess set about knocking 
down the trees with impetuous violence. Then that hero, 
Hanum&n, devastated that garden of the damsels, resounding 
with the roars of mad elephants, and filled with diverse trees 
and shrubs. And with its trees crushed and its tanks dam- 
aged, with its fair peaks shattered in fragments and its pools 

* The commentator explains this passage thus : — “He that by great pains 
iccomplishes a small work, cannot he a great actor ; but he that bringetb 
ibout his end in a variety of ways through the minimum of effort, is the 
actor/*— T. 

t s. #. see Siti. 




1014 



RlMATANA . 



eloquent with the notes of birds, riven all over, with coppery 
and withered sprays cast about (in all directions), and with 
its trees and plants shorn of their liveliness, — that wood was 
no longer beautiful,— as if it had been burnt up by a forest- 
fire ; and its plants resembled damsels with their apparel 
falling off. And that magnificent wood, with its arbours and 
its picture-gallerys destroyed, and its ferocious animals, 
beasts and birds crying in distressful accents,— and its rocky 
structures and other mansions broken down, was bereft of 
its loveliness. And that grove of the inner apartment belong- 
ing to the damsels* of the Ten-necked one, with its numbers 
of agoka trees and plants cast about disorderly, was, in very 
sooth, through the might of the monkey, rendered a sight 
composed of plants, etc., tending to awaken the regret of the 
spectator.*!* Then having done what was wondrous disagree- 
able unto the mind of the magnanimous lord of the world, 
that monkey desirous of coping alone with a vast host, stood 
by the main entrance, flaming in effulgence. 



SECTION XLII. 



Then on account of the cries of birds and the sounds of 
breaking trees, all the denizons of LanUL were seized 
with trepidation in consequence of fright. And agitated 
with fear, birds and beasts hurried (on all sides) ; and omen! 



* Promaddvanasya — gen.— occurs twice in this passage. The commse* 
tator, as usual, refines on the word, — to one he assigns a literal sense ; another 
he explains — of the grove belonging to the protector of the f emmlet ,— L e. ths 
wood, which, by arousing their desire for Rivana, assured their stay 
there !— T. 

t There is a pun on the word joia— occuring twice. One of tkm, 
originally afoJka, but entering into a vowel combination with the preceding 
word, is the name of a tree ; and Soka means sorrom. The efote tre es bebf 
shattered, inspired the onlooker with soh*— sorrow . — T . 





SUN DA RA KIND AM. 



101$ 



boding evil unto the R&kshasas, began to appear (every- 
where). And gritn-visaged R&kshasis, awaking from their 
sleep, saw that wood devastated, and that heroic mighty 
monkey. And observing them, that mighty-armed and 
powerful monkey endowed with immense strength, magnified 
his dimensions, capable of striking terror into the R&ksha- 
sas. And beholding that exceedingly strong monkey resembl- 
ing a mountain, the R&kshasis asked Janaka’s daughter, 
saying, —“Who is this ? And whence, and wherefore, hath 
he come here ? And why did he carry on converse with 
thee ? Tell us this, thou of expansive eyes. O lucky 
one, entertain no fear. And, O thou having eyes with 
dark outer corners, what is the talk that this one hath held 
with thee ?” Thereat, the chaste Sit&, having all her parts 
perfect, answered, — “What is my power to read R&ksliasas 
capable of wearing forms at will ? Ye know who he is and 
what he doeth. Serpents, without doubt, know the way of 
serpents. And, furthermore, I am very much frightened,— 
nor know I who that one is. I take him to be a R&kshasa,— 
who hath come here through his capacity to put on any 
shape." Hearing Vaidehi’s words, the R&kshasis swiftly 
took to their heels. Some remained, — and some departed 
to inform R&vana of the matter. And before R&vana, the 
R&ksbasis of deformed visages informed him of the hide- 
ous and dreadful monkey. “O king, in the heart of the afoka 
wood there is a monkey of a terrific body, who, possessed 
of immeasurable might, stayeth, after having carried on a 
conversation with J&naki. Nor, albeit questioned by us many 
a time and oft, doth Jmaka’s daughter, Sit&, having the eyes 
of a deer, intend to tell us who the monkey is. He may be 
the emissary of V&sava, or of Vaipravana ; or he may have 
been sent by R&ma himself from eagerness to get at the 
whereabouts of Silk. And he it is that, wearing a wonder- 
ful form, hath destroyed thy charming arbour of the interior, 
filled with beasts of various kinds.— And quarter there is 




KlAIXYiN*. 



i«i6 

none which hath not been destroyed by him ; and only that 
place where the exalted J&naki is, remaineth uninjured by 
him, — whether for preserving J&naki, or from fatigue— it 
doth not appear. But what is his fatigue ? She it is that 
hath been preserved by him. And that overgrown Sin£ap& 
tree, affluent with elegant foliage, under which Sit& herself 
hath (always rested), hath been spared by him. It beboveth 
thee to order sharp chastisement to be inflicted on that one 
of a fierce form, who, having carried on converse with SitS, 
hath laid thy wood waste. Who, O Sovereign of the 
R&kshasas,that bath not his life severed from him,— converseth 
with Sit&, who bath captivated thy heart ?” Hearing the 
speeches of the R&kshasis, R&vana, lord of R&kshasas, 
with his eyes rolling in rage, flamed up like the fire of a 
funeral pyre. And as fall drops of lighted oil from a flaming 
lamp, fell drops of tears from the eyes of the enraged R&vana. 
And that highly energetic one ordered his heroic servants, 
resembling himself, to punish Hanumin. And from that man- 
sion speedily issued eighty thousand of those retainers, carry- 
ing in their hands maces and mallets*, — having huge 
bellies, and large teeth, of dreadful forms, and possessed of 
unwieldy strength, — all eager to engage in the conflict and 
take Hanum&n. And having come near that monkey staying 
at the main entrance, those swelling spirits rushed on, even 
as insects rush into a flame. And equipped with variegated 
maces, and bludgeons, and golden angadas , t and arrows re- 
sembling the Sun, they approached that foremost of monkeys. 
And accoutred in maces, axes.and javelins, and bearing beard- 
ed darts and lances in their hands, they suddeuly surrounded 
Hanum&n and remained before him. And the graceful and 
energetic Hanum&n also, resembling a hill, flourishing his 
tail over the ground, sent up tremendous roars. And attain- 

* Kuta — hammer . The commentator, however, says that it means a weapon 
resembling a hammer. — T. 

t A bracelet worn op the upper arm,-^T. 





SVNDA RA RlNDA M 



l6l7 

ing, mighty proportions, Hanuman, son unto the Wind-god, 
brandished his tail, filling Lanka with sounds. And at the 
sounds of his flourishing, as well as with those resounding 
ones set up by himself, birds began to drop down from the 
sky. And he loudly proclaimed, — “Victory to the exceedingly 
strong Rama and to the mighty Lakshmana ! And victory 
unto king Sugriva, protected of RSghava ! I am the servant 
of the Sovereign of Ko9ala, Rama of untiring deeds,— 
(I am) Hanuman, the destroyer of hostile hosts, offspring of 
the Wind-god. And a thousand Ravanas cannot cope with 
me in conflict, when I shall hurl crags and trees by 
thousands. In the very presence of all the Rakshas, shall 
I, having desolated the city of Lanka and paid my 
reverence to Maithili, go away, my end being compassed.” 
They were struck with affright at his roars ; and they beheld 
Hanuman elevated as an evening cloud. And now knowing 
for certain that the monkey had been despatched by his 
master,' the Rakshasas commenced assailing him with various 
kinds of dire arms* Environed on all sides by those 
heroes, that exceedingly powerful one, staying by the main 
entrance, took up a terrific bolt. And taking that bolt, like 
Vinata’s offspring handling a darting serpent, he slew those 
rangers of the night. And grasping (the bolt), the Wind- 
god’s son began to range the welkin and destroy (the 
Rakshasas), like the thousand-eyed(deity)slaughtering Daityas 
with his thunder-bolt. And having slain those Rakshasas, 
who were the retainers of Ravana, the heroic offspring of 
the Wind-god — foremost of heroes — desirous of fight, stood 
at the gate. Then certain Rakshasas, getting off from the 
field in fear, informed Ravana of the destruction of all his 
servants. Hearing that a mighty host of the Rakshasas had 
been slain, the king, with his eyes whirling in ire, ordered 

* Swdmisandehanihfancdh — may also mean, having been assured by 
Rdvana as to his firm resolve — i.e. the Rdkshasas must fight with Hanumdn % 
however desperate the undertaking might prove . — 7*. 

128 





ioiS 



RAAIIYaNa. 



Prahasta’s son of incomparable prowess, aud invincible in 
battle. 



SECTION XL I II. 



H aving slaughtered the servants f Hanumln, having 
reflected awhile, thought, — “I have broken down the wood ; 
but have not destroyed the edifice dedicated to the deities 
of the R«Lkshasas. Therefore, this very day will I demolish 
this structure/’ Having thought thus in his heart, that 
foremost of monkeys, Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god, 
displaying his strength, bounded unto the Chaitya* building, 
elevated like a summit of Meru. And having ascended the 
edifice resembling a mountain, that leader of monkey-bands, 
possessed of wondrous energy, looked like another Sun 
risen (in the sky). And having broken down that superb 
edifice, the irrepressible HanumHn, flaming in auspiciousness, 
resembled (the mountain) Pariy&tra. And magnifying his 
dimensions through his energy, the offspring of the Wind- 
god fearlessly fell to striking his arms with his hands,and thus 
filling LankSL with the sounds. And at those sounds of 
striking arms, capable of striking deafness into the hearer, 
birds began to drop down there, as well as the warders of the 
religious mansion, with their senses overwhelmed. “Victory 
unto Rama versed in arms \ And unto Lakshmana endowed 
with immense strength ! And victory unto king Sugriva, 
who is protected by R&ghava I Hanumln, son unto the 
Wind-god, destroyer of hostile hosts, is the slave of Rftma 
of untiring deeds. And not a thousand Rlvanas cata cope 
with me in conflict as I hurl stones and trees by thousands. 
Having destroyed the city of Lankl and paid my respects 
to Mithill’s daughter, I, my object gained, shall depart in the 



A building designed for deities.— T. 




SUNDA RA KIND AM. 



10x9 

presence of ail the R&kshasas.” Having spoken thus! that 
one of a prodigious person, seated on the Chaitya t emitted 
tremendous roars, striking terror into the Rakshas, In con* 
sequence of that mighty cry, an hundred guards attached to 
the Chaitya sallied out, taking various weapons — bearded 
darts, scimitars and axes ; and they surrounded the Wind- 
god’s offspring, as he went on increasing his body. And 
they encountered that foremost of monkeys with various 
maces, and axes, and golden Angadas , and arrows resembling 
the Sun. And those numbers of Rakshas, encountering that 
best of monkeys, resembled an extensive and mighty whirlpool 
in the Gang&. Thereat, the Wind-god’s son, the mighty 
Hanum&n ,* waxing enraged, violently uprooting a huge piller of 
the edifice, plated with gold, and having an hundred borders, 
began to whirl it (in the air).+ And the fire generated 
there thus, burnt down the entire edifice. Seeing that 
edifice in flames, the graceful monkey-leader, having slain 
the hundred R&kshasas, like Indra slaying Asuras with his 
thunderbolt, — remaining in the sky, said, — “ Thousands of 
strong, high-souled and foremost monkeys like myself, having 
been created, and remaining under the command of Sugriva, 
—including ourselves as well as other monkeys — are ranging 
all over the world. Some are endowed with the strength of 
ten elephants, some with the strength of an hundred, some 
have the prowess of a thousand elephants, and some 
the strength of elephants numbered by herds. Some are 
equal in strength to the Wind, — and there are there some 
monkey-leaders who have no limit to their strength. Sur^ 
rounded with monkeys of this sort, having nails and teeth for 
their arms,— in hundreds and thousands and kotis and 
ayutas, cometh our Sugriva,— the slayer of all (foes). 

• Marutatmaya — son unto the Wind-god, left out on the score of re- 
dendeocj.— -T. 

f The reader is powerfully reminded of a like feat of Manoah's job— 4 tke 
Herculean Samson.’— T. 





1020 



RlMlFANA. 



Neither this city of Lanka, nor you, nor yet R&vana, shall 
exist, — having created hostility with that high-souled hero 
of the Ikshw&ku race. 11 



SECTION XL I V. 



Commanded by the lord of R&kshasas, Prahasta’s son, 
the powerful Jamvum&li, having large teeth, went out bow 
in hand. And he wore a red wreath and attire, with a 
garland hung round his neck, and elegant ear-rings ; and 
he was huge, and terrible, with his eyes whirling, — invincible 
in encounter. And he impetuously stretched a graceful bow, 
resembling the bow of Sakra, and roaring like vajra and the 
thunderbolt.* And the entire welkin, and all sides and 
quarters, were suddenly filled with the mighty sounds of that 
bow as it was being stretched. And seeing him approaching 
in a car yoked with asses, HanumAn endowed with vigour 
both rejoiced and shouted. Thereat, the highly energetic 
Jamvum&li pierced with whetted shafts that mighty monkey, 
HanumSLn, who was seated on an awry plank at the gate 
serving as a perch for pigeons.f He pierced that lord of 
monkey's face with half-moon (shaped) arrows, his head with 
one having its head made like a hook and his arms with ten 
n&rdchas.X And pierced by the arrows, his coppery face 
looked beautiful like a blown autumnal red lotus shot at by the 
solar rays. — And his naturally red countenance being painted 
with blood, looked lovely like a majestic red lotus in the sky, 
washed with the honey of the red agoka . — Wounded by the 
shafts, the redoubted monkey grew enraged. And he espied 

♦ For distinction between the two, vide ante. — T. 

t This is all that I can make of the commentator’s gloss on toranavi- 
tanka.—T. 

J Iron arrows. — T. 




SUNDA RA KXNDA M. 



1071 



a huge and gigantic crag beside him. Thereat, at once up- 
rooting it, that one endowed with celerity and strength hurled 
it (at his foe). And the enraged RSLkshasa opposed it by ten 
shafts. Witnessing his action rendered fruitless, the energe- 
tic Hanum&n of terrific prowess, uprooting a large sdla , 
began to whirl it (in the air). Seeing the exceedingly strong 
monkey whirling the sdla tree, the highly powerful Jamvum&li 
dischanged a many shafts. And he severed the sdla by 
means of four shafts, and wounded the monkey in the arm 
with five, in the chest, with one, and with ten, between the 
teats. With his body covered all over with shafts, (HanumSn) 
getting into a furious passion, taking up the same bolt, again 
began to swing it with rapidity. And that terrific one 
gifted with exceeding impetuosity, having whirled the bolt 
with wondrous rapidity, let it light upon Jamvum&li’s spacious 
breast. And (anon) there was neither seen there his head, nor 
his arms, nor his thighs, nor his bow, nor his car, nor his steeds, 
nor his arrows at that place. And that mighty car-warrior, 
JamvumSli, speedily slain, fell down to the earth, like a 
tree whose trunk hath been crushed. Hearing Jamvum&li 
as well as his exceedingly powerful servants slaughtered, 
Rlvana became transported with anger, and his eyes became 
reddened in wrath. And on the mighty son of Prahasta 
having been slain, the lord of the night-rangers, with his 
reddened eyes rolling in rage, speedily commanded the 
sons of his counsellors, endowed with vast energy and 
prowess, (to encounter Hanum&n in battle.) 




1012 



RlMlYANA 



SECTION XL V. 



Then ordered by the lord of R&kshasas, the sons of his 
counsellors, seven (in number), in splendour resembling fire, 
issued forth from that mansion. And surrounded by a mighty 
army, furnished with bows, endowed with wondrous strength, 
and accomplished in arms— the foremost of those acquainted 
with weapons — each burning for victory, with mighty cars 
yoked with steeds, covered with golden net-works, bearing 
pennons and standards, and having sounds like those proceed- 
ing from clouds, — exultingly stretching with immeasurable 
prowess bows decked with gold, — resembling clouds surcharged 
with lightning, — those warriors sallied out. Learning that the 
servants had been slain, their* mothers, along with their 
friends and kindred, were overpowered with grief. And 
vieing with each other in eagerness, those (warriors) decked 
in ornaments of polished gold, confronted Hanum&n staying 
at the gate. And with their cars sending roars, the R&kshasas, 
pouring showers of shafts, ranged (the field), resembliog 
clouds during the rainy season. And covered with those 
arrowy showers, Hanumln had his person concealed, like the 
monarch of mountains hidden by a downpour. And that 
swift-speeding monkey, coursing the cloudless sky, evaded 
those shafts of those heroes, as well as the impetuosity of 
their cars. And that hero, playing pranks with those bow- 
men, appeared like the masterful Wind playing tricks with 
the bow-bearing clouds.t And sending up a dreadful shout, 
and thereby filling that vast host with fright, the energetic 
Hanum&n rushed on that R&kshasa army. And that subduer 
of enemies slew some with slaps, and some he rived with 
nails, and some he killed by blows, and others with (the 



* i. *. the mothers of the sons of the councillors.— T. 
t i. 0. having the iris.— T. 





SUNDARAKlNDAM . 



io*3 



pressure of) bis chest. And some dropped down on the 
ground at the very same spot at the sounds that he emitted. 
And on their being slain or falling on the earth, that army, 
afflicted with affright, began to fly in all directions. And the 
elephants roared in frightful tones, and the steeds fell down 
on the earth.— And the Earth was covered with broken boxes, 
flagstaffs, and umbrellas, (belonging to the cars), as also with 
the cars themselves.— And rivers running gore were seen on 
the way, and Lankft uttered various frightful cries. And having 
slain those overgrown R&kshasas, that exceedingly powerful 
and heroic monkey of terrific power, desirous of again coping 
with other R&ksbasas, retraced his steps to the self-same 
entrance. 



8E0TI0N x L v I . 



I LEARNING that the sons of the counsellors had been 
slain by the high-souled monkey, the Ten-necked one sup- 
pressing the apprehension that was in his heart, restored the 
balance of his mind. And he directed five of the foremost 
leaders of his forces, the heroic Viruplksha, Yupaksha, the 
Rftkshasa Durdharsha, Praghasa, and Mlsakarna, versed in 
polity, endowed with the speed of the Wind in conflict and 
alert on every occasion, to take HanumSLn captive.“Ye generals, 
do ye taking a mighty host with steeds, elephants and cars, 
chastise that monkey. And coming to that dweller of the 
woods, ye had better act heedfully, and should accomplish 
this work in consonance with place and season. Having 
regard to his acts, I do not take him to be a monkey. He 
is a great being endowed with extraordinary prowess ever y 
way. My mind is not satisfied that he is a monkey. He 
may have been brought into being by Indra, through aseetic 
might, for injuring us. Backed by you, I have defeated- 




1024 



RiMATANA. 



(deities), and N&gas, and Yakshas, and Gandharbas, and 
Asuras, and Maharshis. And, for certain, they hare herein 
tried to do us some wrong. Therefore there is no doubt 
about this, — do ye by main force take him. And, ye generals, 
go ye, taking a mighty force with steeds, elephants and 
cars. Do ye chastise this monkey. This monkey of deli- 
berate prowess should not be disregarded by yon. I have 
seen* monkeys of immense prowess,— V&li with Sugriva 
and the exceedingly powerful J&mbavftn, and Nila the 
general, and others with Dwivida at their head. Their speed 
is not dreadful, nor their energy, nor their prowess, nor 
their intelligence, nor their strength, nor their courage, nor 
their capacity to change shapes. Therefore ye should know 
him as some great being staying in the form of a monkey. 
Exerting yourself to the uttermost, do ye chastise him. 
These three worlds combined, with Indra, celestials and 
mortals, are incapable of long staying before you in the field 
of battle. Still a person versed in polity, albeit anxious to 
secure victory in battle, should carefully preserve self, as 
success in war is unstable . 11 Thereupon, they, possessed of 
the energy of fire, accepting the words of their master,rusbed 
forth vehemently, accompanied with cars, mad elephants, 
fleet steeds, sharp and whetted weapons,— and forces of all 
kinds. Then those heroes saw that effulgent mighty monkey, 
shining in his native splendour, like Unto the risen sun,— 
possessed of great strength and immense speed, and magnani- 
mity of mind, — seated at the gate. And soon as they saw 
him, they, frightened at his appearance, assailed him with 
their respective terrible weapons. And Durdhasa discharged 
at HanumSLn's head five white ironf arrows with yellow 
heads, and possessing the lustre of lotus-leaves. Having 

* There is a word — sigkra , soon — in this sloka, of which I fail to p w c ri* 
the relation. — T. 

f This may rather look an incongrnoes mixture of images ; bet the few 
arrows may have been silvtrtd over. — T. 



SUN DA RA RlNDA M. 



1025 



been pierced in the head with those shafts, the monkey, 
roaring, leapt into the sky, making the ten cardinal points 
resound. Then the exceedingly powerful and heroic Durdhara, 
mounted on a car, with his bow stringed, came forward, 
showering innumerable arrows by hundreds. Thereat, even 
as the wind driveth away rain-pouring clouds at the end of 
the rainy season, the monkey, remaining in the sky, resisted 
(his antagonist) as he kept on pouring his shafts. And sore 
beset by Durdhara, the Wind-god’s son again emitted cries, 
and that puissant one also increased himself. Then darting 
far up in the air, the monkey suddenly descended on the 
car of Durdhara with extreme vehemence, like unto a 
mass of lightning alighting on a mountain. — Thereat his 
eight steeds getting mangled, and the wheels and pole of 
his car having been broken, Durdhara leaving the car, fell 
down to the earth, deprived of life. Seeing him down on the 
earth, those irrepressible subduers of enemies, Virup£ksha 
and YupSLksha, waxing wroth, sprang up. And springing up 
suddenly, they by means of maces, dealt blows on the chest 
of the monkey, who was staying in the unclouded sky. 
Thereat resisting the furious rush of those gifted with ebullient 
energy, that exceedingly powerful one descended to the 
earth with the violence of the Fair-feathered (bird).* Then 
getting at and uprooting a sdla tree, that monkey, the 
Wind-god’s offspring, slew both of those heroic Rikshasas. 
Learning that those three had been slain by the monkey 
gifted with speed, the mighty and onrushing Praghasa 
laughing in scorn advanced (in the encounter). And the 
energetic Bh&sakarna also came forward in rage, taking a 
dart. And (they) meeting together, Praghasa assailed the 
famous, tiger-like monkey with a sharp-edged axe, and 
Bh&sakarna (attacked) the elephantine monkey with a javelin. 
And with his limbs wounded by them, and his hair wetted 
with blood, that monkey resembling in splendour the infant 

* Suparna — a name of Garura. — T. 



129 





KlMlFANA. 



9*ei 

sun, grew furiously enraged. And that elephantine monkey, 
the heroic Hanumkn, uprooting a mountain-peak, with beasts, 
snakes, and trees (in it), slew those Rftkshasas ; and, crushed 
by that mountain-summit, they were reduced to powder. On 
those five generals having fallen, the monkey slew the 
remaining forces. And as the thousand-eyed Deity destroyed 
Asuras, the monkey destroyed steeds with steeds, elephants 
with elephants, warriors with warriors, and cars with cars. 
And with horses and elephants, swift steeds, with broken 
wheels and mighty cars, and Rkkshasas slain, all the ways 
were blocked up. And having destroyed in battle the heroic 
generals with all their forces and vehicles, that hero in 
the same .way rested at the gate like Kftla himself engaged in 
destroying people, when he hath gained respite. 



SECTION XLVII. 

— > • ■— t 

TT earing that the five generals bad been slain by 
Hanumln alone with their vehicles and followers, the king, 
gazing at prince Aksha, who was ready and eager to go to 
battle, commanded him to take the field. And that pu issan t 
one of a bow decked with gold, on being commanded (by 
R&vana) with a glance, started up, like unto fire on being 
fed by clarified butter by foremost regenerate persons on the 
sacrificial ground. And that best of Nairitas* possessed of 
prowess, ascending a car resembling the infant son m 
effulgence, and surrounded all round with networks of 
burnished gold, sallied forth in quest of that mighty monkey. 4 
And (that warrior) in prowess resembliug an immortal^al lied | 
out ascending that car, obtained with long-continued 
asceticism, embellished with a network of glowing gold, | 




• R&kshasas. 




SONDA RA KIND A M. 



1027 



furnished with pennons, having a standard studded with gems, 
nicely yoked with eight excellent steeds having the fleetness 
of thought, incapable of being overpowered either by 
celestials or Asuras,competent to course over uneven ground, 
of the lustre of lightning, sky-ranging, completely 
garnished, equipped with quivers, with swords fastened to 
the banners in eight directions, with darts and lances 
arranged in proper places, splendid with every object in full 
measure, bearing golden threads, wearing the brilliancy 
of the sun and moon, and possessing the effulgence of the 
sun. And filling the firmament and the earth containing 
mountains with sounds proceeding from steeds, elephants and 
mighty cars, — he, accompanied by his forces, presented 
himself before the capable monkey, who was seated at the 
gate. And coming before the monkey, Aksha, having the 
gaze of a lion, with eyes betokening regard, gazed at Hanum&n 
resembling the Fire on the occassion of the universal dissolu- 
tion at the end of a yuga } intent on destroying creatures, and 
who was seated and was influenced alike by surprise and 
regard. And seriously considering the impetuosity of the 
high-souled monkey as well as his prowess in relation to a 
foe, — as also his own strength, he increased (in strength) like 
the Sun on the expiration of a Yuga. And growing enraged, 
(Aksha), staying calmly in the field, with concentrated soul, 
challenged HanumSn difficult to resist in conflict and of 
prowess worthy to witness, with three whetted shafts. And 
finding the monkey proud and untiring, capable of vanquish- 
ing his foe, and possessed of exalted spirits, Aksha took up 
bis bow and held his arrows in his hands. And wearing 
a golden corslet, angadas , and eariugs, and possessed of 
fiery vigor, he closed with the monkey ; and their meeting 
was something unparalleled on this earth, — and was calculat- 
ed to raise the respect* even of the celestials and the 

* Sambhramaprada t according to R&m&nuja, means, capable of exciting 





1028 



RlMlLYANA . 



Asuras. And witnessing the mighty conflict of the prince 
and the monkey. Earth emitted cries, and the Sun did not 
burn, and the Wind did not blow, and the mountains shook, 
and the welkin sounded, and the main was vexed. And 
that hero, skilled in aiming, fixing and discharging arrows, 
shot at the monkey’s head three fine-headed feathered shafts 
plated with gold near the feathers, and resembling venomous 
serpents. And with his rolling eyes washed with blood in 
consequence of the shafts having alighted at his head, 
Hanum&n, resembling a new-risen Sun having arrows for its 
rays, looked splendid like the light-engarlanded Sun. And 
seeing in battle that son of the foremost of monarchs, with 
his excellent weapons upraised and his beautiful bow, that 
best of the counsellors of the lord of monkeys, rejoiced, and 
intent on encounter, increased himself. And with bis ire 
heightened, that one endowed with energy and prowess, like 
unto the ray-decorated (Sun) on the crest of Mandara,* began 
to burn with the fiery rays of his eyes, Aksha, along with 
his forces and vehicles. And as a mass of clouds showereth 
rain on a high hill, the arrow-showering R&kshasa resembling 
clouds, having the bow for his rain-bow, discharged shafts 
at that foremost of monkeys, representing a mountain. And 
then the monkey, having sounds like those of clouds, 
beholding in battle Aksha of terrific prowess in conflict, 
and strong in energy, strength and shafts, sent up shouts 
from elation of spirits. And as an elephant approachcth a 
deep pit covered over with grass, (Aksha) from a spirit of 
childishness elated in conflict with his prowess, with his ire 
heightened, and eyes resembling blood, drew near the 
monkey in the field. And as Aksha went on hastily pouring 
shafts, that one uttering roars resembling the rumbling of 
clouds, looking terrible in consequence of his arms and thighs 
flung about, darted into the sky with exhuberant energy. And 

* The Sun is on Mandara in mid-day ; therefore the meridian 8>> b 
meant here.— T. 



SUN DA RA KIND A M. 



1029 



as be leapt up, that strong and powerful one— -foremost of 
R&kshasas— that car-warrior and the best of choice car- 
warriors — rushed at (Hanum£n), showering arrows on him, 
like a cloud showering hail-stones on a mountain. And 
dashing in the midst- of the arrows like the wind, and thus 
baffling them, the heroic monkey of dreadful prowess in 
conflict, and endowed with the speed of thought, began to 
range the path of the air. And witnessing Aksha with 
regardful eyes, as that one intent on contest, taking his bow, 
was covering the sky with various excellent arrows, the 
Wind-god's offspring was plunged in thought. Wounded in 
the arm with shafts by that high-souled, noble prince, that 
mighty-armed one, capable of adequately appreciating the 
nature of actions, thought on (Aksha's) prowess in battle. 
“This exceedingly powerful one, endowed with the splendour 
of the infant sun, is doing dire deeds incapable of being 
done by a boy ; and I am loth to slay one that hath shown 
himself equal to every martial feat. This one is high-souled, 
mighty in energy, of concentrated self, and capable of bearing 
extreme* hardships in war ; without doubt, by virtue of 
his actions, he is worthy of being honored by NUgas, Yakshas 
and ascetics. With his mind braced by prowess and hope, that 
foremost of heroes eyeth me staying in the fore-front. The 
prowess of this light-handed (one), I ween, maketh even 
the hearts of the celestials and Asuras tremble. If I 
disregard him, he shall certainly vanquish me, for his 
prowess in battle increaseth (fast). Therefore I must even 
slay him : it is not proper to suffer an increasing fire. 11 Thus 
reflecting on the strength of his foe and having ascertained 
his line of action, that puissant one endowed with great 
strength, summoned energy and set his heart on slaying 
him (his antagonist). And remaining in the path coursed 
by the air, that heroic monkey, the offspring of the Wind-god, 
with his slaps slew his eight powerful and excellent steeds, 
capable of bearing pressure and trained to diverse circular 




1030 



RAMlFlNA. 



movements. And successfully assailed by the councilor 
of that lord of monkeys, the car with its seat smashed, and 
its pole broken, and deprived of its steeds, fell to the earth 
from the sky. Thereat, forsaking that car, the mighty car- 
warrior sprang up into sky with his bow and holding his 
sabre, — and (resembled) an ascetic of fierce energy conse- 
quent on austerities, going up to heaven, renouncing his 
body. Then the monkey possessed of the energy and vigor 
of the Wind, approaching him as he was ranging the air 
coursed by the king of birds, the Wind and the Siddhas, at 
length fast caught hold of his legs. And as the foremost of 
birds, Garura taking a mighty serpent, whirls it, that foremost 
of monkeys, resembling his sire in prowess, whirling Aksha 
in the conflict, violently dropped him on the earth. And 
with his arms, thighs and chest crushed, bleeding, (having 
his bones and eyes smashed, his joints riven, and his tendons 
snapped, the RSLkshasa lay on the eartb,slain by the offspring 
of the Wind-god. And tormenting him (Aksha) on the earth, 
that mighty monkey caused great fright unto the ruler of the 
Rakshasas ; and he was gazed at by the assembled Maharshis 
and the orbit-coursing ones and all beings with Yakshtt 
and Pannagas, come to see him. And on the prises 
being slain, that monkey was gazed at by the celestials with 
Indra, who had been seized with extreme wonderment 
And having slain in battle prince Aksha resembling a son 
of the celestials and possessed of blood-red eyes, the here 
(again) neared the same gate, and waited there like KtU 
bent upon destroying all creatures. 




SUNDARA KIND AM. 



1031 



SECTION XLVin. 



On prince Aksha having been slain by HanumSn, the 
magnanimous monarch of the RAkshasas, wrought up by wrath, 
repressing his feelings, ordered Indrajit resembling a 
celestial, (to take the field against the foe.) “Thou art the 
foremost of those bearing arms ; and thou hast afflicted 
even the gods and Asuras (in battle) ; thy deeds have been 
witnessed by the celestials with Indra; and thou hast pro- 
cured a weapon* even from the Great-father. And coping 
(in conflict) with thy might of arms, all the celestials with 
the Maruts, headed by the lord of celestials himself, could 
not stay in the field. And there is none in these three worlds 
(save thyself), who doth not come under the influence of 
fatigue in battle. And thou art preserved by the prowess 
of thy arms, and protected also by thy ascetic merit ; and 
being skilled in the knowledge of season and place, thou, 
methinks, art the foremost of them all in intelligence. And 
there is no deed which thou canst not perform in the field ; 
and there is nothing in counsel capable of being arrived at 
by arguing on the lines prescribed by the scriptures, which 
thou art not equal to ; and there is none in all the three 
worlds who doth not know thy strength and prowess in arms. 
And thy ascetic energy is like unto mine, as well as thy 
prowess and might in arms in battle. And having thee 
in the conflict, my mind assured (of victory), doth not expe- 
rience sorrow. Slain have been all the servants, as also 
Jamvum&li, and those five generals, the heroic sons of my 
councilors, and the swelling forces including steeds, 
elephants and cars. And low lieth Mahodara, and prince 
Aksha hath also been slain. O destroyer of foes, my mind 



- * 



via. the Brahma weapon.— T. 




RlMlYANA. 



103a 

did not feel the same confidence in them that I do in thee.* 
And seeing this mighty host slain, as well as the prowess 
and energy of the monkey, and the taking into consideration 
thine own strength, do thou put forth thy energy according 
to thy strength. And on nearing the scene (of conflict), 
do thou, O foremost of those bearing arms, seeing thine 
own strength and that of the foe, so exert thyself that the 
latter, (now) resting quietly in consequence of having created a 
carnage (on the hostile hosts), may wax enfeebled.t O hero, 
army can serve no purpose here ; for hosts fly (before) 
HanumSn or are reduced to nothing. Neither can it avail 
to use arms of terrific power and resembling the thunderbolt. 
Nothing can resist the rush of the Wind-god’s offspring ; 
and this one like unto fire is incapable of being slain with 
weapons. Revolving well (in thy mind what I have remarked), 
do thou in order to the attainment of success, with an 
intent mind remember the divine virtue of this bow, and 
repairing (to battle) strive to vanquish the foe, baffling his 
attacks.]: O foremost of intelligent ones, (that I send 

thee to battle) is certainly not proper ; yet this course of 
action is endorsed by Kshatriyas and those following 
the morality of kings. O subduer of enemies, one should be 
versed in various branches of learning as well as be masterful 
in war.§ He that craves victory in fight, should be acquaint* 
ed with various branches of knowledge. || 

* According to another reading, the meaning would be :— “O beat of 
warriors, do thou, considering thy own strength and that of the enemy, at 
exert thyself that he may no longer inflict terrible losses on oar ansy” 
(Tirtha).— T. 

f Another meaning is : Looking on thyself, and (net an my fanes), as 
constituting my main stay t put forth thy promess. — 7*. 

t One should know in what branches of knowledge one's enemy is ptoflcM, 
and, understanding this, one should strive for victory.— T. 

§ According to a different reading, the meaning would be, “Thou ait cssp 
tent to fight agreeably to the rules."— T. 

!l The Sloka is very difficult and incapable of interpretation without *t 
places meanings being read into it.— T. 




sundarakAndam. 



I0 33 

Hearing the words of his father, (Indrajit) gifted with 
celestial prowess, determined to fight, instantly circumambu- 
lated him. Excited with a desire for fight and worked up 
with energy, Indrajit, eulogized by the friendly Rakshasas, 
set out for battle. And that highly effulgent and graceful 
son of the lord of the R&kshasas, having expansive eyes 
resembling lotus-petals, — issued out like unto the rising of 
the ocean during a parva .* Thereupon Indrajit of unbear- 
able prowess, equal to the lord of the celestials, ascended 
a car drawn by four horses, having sharpened teeth and 
resembling Garura in velocity. And that master of a car and 
foremost of bowmen, conversant with the use of all weapons 
—the best of those using swords — proceeded soon in his car 
where Hanum£n was. And hearing the sound of his car and 
the twang of his bow, that heroic monkey attained an excess 
of delight. And taking up a bow and sharpened darts, 
Indrajit, versed in the rules of war, proceeded towards 
Hanum&n. And as he issued out for battle, greatly delighted, 
with arrows in his hands, all the quarters became dark, 
and jackals began to set up terrible cries. And there 
arrived the Nagas , the Yakshas , the Afaharskis, the planets, 
and the Siddhas, and the birds, covering the welkin, and, 
greatly delighted, began to make a noise. And beholding that 
car having a flag like that of Indra, approach very quickly, 
the monkey began to emit terrible roars and increase 
himself. And Indrajit too, seated on the celestial car and 
having a painted bow, began to stretch it, emitting a sound 
resembling that of thunder. Thereupon closed in conflict 
those two greatly powerful (heroes) — gifted with swift move- 
ments and fearless in battle — the monkey, and the son of the 
lord of R£kshasas, like unto the lords of celestials and Asuras. 
And baffling the shafts of that hero of a mighty car, an accom- 
plished bowman and a finished warrior, the immeasurably 

• A name given to certain days in the lunar month at the full and change 
of the moon, and the 8th and 14th of each half month.— T. 



130 





1034 



RlMlYANA . 



powerful monkey increasing himself began to range in 
the welkin.* Thereupon the heroic (Indrajit)— slayer of 
foes— began to discharge incessantly shafts, large, sharp, 
well-feathered, painted in gold and swift-coursing like unto 
thunder. And hearing again the noise of his car, the sounds of 
drums, bugles, and war-drums, and the twangs of the bow, he 
again leaped up (in the sky). And baffling the aim of (Indrajit), 
who had always an eye on it, that great monkey ranged at 
a distance from those shafts. And again facing the arrows 
and stretching his hands, the Wind-god’s son again leaped up. 
And those two heroes, gifted with swift movements and versed 
in the art of war, engaged in a combat, admired of all 
beings. And Hanum&n could not find out the short-comings of 
the Rlkshasa, nor could that high-souled one detect the 
weak points of the son of the Wind-god. And these two 
gifted with celestial prowess, engaged in conflict, became 
unbearable unto each other. And seeing him unhurt though 
aimed at with infallible arrows, the high-souled (Indrajit), con- 
trolling his senses, engaged in deep and devout meditationf 
(to realize the true identity of HanumSn). Thereupon, that 
son of the lord of Rakshasas pinned his thoughts upon 
that foremost of monkeys, and, finding him incapable of 
being slain, he began to devise plans how he could be bound. 
And that hero, foremost of those versed in the use of 
weapons, discharged at that best of monkeys the highly 
powerful weapon conferred on him by Brahma, the Great- 
father of the celestials. And knowing him incapable of being 
slain, Indrajit conversant with the use of weapons, bound 

* Literally it means the passage of his father. Hanumdn’s father being 
the Wind, it means the sky. — T. 

f According to Hindu philosophy, one by virtue of yoga and self-control 
can realize many great things which are beyond ordinary human concept 
tion. Beholding Hanum&n unhurt though assailed incessantly with terrible 
shafts, Indrajit at once jumped at the conclusion that he must be a great spirit 
in a monkey-form. To realize who he in reality was, he engaged in yog& 
or devout meditation. — T. 





SUN DA RA Kl NDA M 



,0 35 

that large-armed son of the Wind-god with that weapon. 
And being bound up by that R&kshasa with the weapon, 
the monkey became motionless and fell down on the earth. 
And thinking that he was bound up with a Brahma weapon, 
he did not feel the least pain in consequence of 
Brahm&’s blessing. And that heroic monkey began to 
think of the boons conferred on him by the Great-father 
of the celestials. And thinking that the weapon was 
conferred by the Self-create and consecrated by sacred 
Mantras, Hanumln began to think of boons conferred 
by the Great-father. “In consequenco of the power of the 
Lord of creation I am incapable of extricating myself 
from these bonds." (Knowing this by means of devout medita- 
tion,he reflected again,) — “This has been ordained by Him,and 
I must put up with this pain for sometime.” Revolving well 
the power of the weapon, the boon of the Great-father, and 
his own prowess to extricate himself from the bonds, the 
monkey followed the Great-father’s behest,— “I do not fear 
though bound by this weapon, since I am being protected by 
Brahm£, Indra and the Wind-god. It will be better if I am 
carried off by the RSkshasas, for I shall reap very 
great benefit by my conversation with the lord of R&kshasas. 
Therefore let the enemies carry me.” Having resolved 
this, the considerate (monkey) — slayer of foes — remained 
motionless. And being ruthlessly bound by the foes 
and remonstrated with by them, he began to moan piteously. 
And beholding that slayer of foes motionless, the R&kshasas 
bound him up with cotton and bark. And he gladly 
allowed himself to be tied up and rebuked by his enemies, 
thinking that he might converse with the lord of the 
R&kshasas, if he, out of curiosity, should like to see him. 
Being bound with bark, that powerful (monkey) got 
himself freed from the binding of the weapon, for the binding 
force of a Brahma weapon becomes null when there is 
any other binding. And beholding that best of monkeys tied 




1036 



It AM A TANA . 



up with bark and liberated from the binding of the weapon, 
Indrajit reflected that the binding force of the Brahma weapon 
became powerless when there was any other binding. “Alas, 
(those Rakshas) have rendered my mighty deed fruitless. 
They know not the action of Mantras.* And on the 
Brahma weapon being baffled, any other weapon cannot effect 
anything ; and thus we have all been placed in a critical 
predicament.” On being released from the weapon, Hanum&n 
did not betray any signs of his liberation, albeit he was 
pulled by the R&kshasas and pained by the bonds they had 
bound him with. And the monkey; Hanum&n, was pulled by 
those cruel R&kshasas having fatal boxes, in the direction of 
the lord of R&kshasas. And seeing (Hanum&n) freed from the 
(Brahma) weapon yet bound by the bark of trees, he (Indrajit) 
showed the exceedingly powerful and highly heroic monkey 
unto the king along with his adherents. And the R&kshasas 
related unto the ruler of Rakshas everything touching that 
foremost of choice monkeys, resembling a mad elephant 
who was in bonds. “Who is he ? And whose son ? And 
wherefrom ? And what’s his errand ? And by whom is he 
backed ?” — thus did the heroic R&kshasas converse on 
beholding Hanum&n. And others said, — “Kill him, 11 “Burn 
him,” — “Eat him up.” The R&kshasas, growing enraged, thus 
said unto each other. — Having passed some way, that 
magnanimous one saw there old servants sitting at the feet 
of the lord of R&kshasas, — as well as a mansion embellished 
with countless jewels. And the exceedingly energetic 
R&vana saw that foremost of monkeys dragged hither and 
thither by R&kshasas of frightful forms. And that be* of 
monkeys too saw that lord of R&kshasas, endowed with < 
strength and energy and resembling the resplendent sea. ^ 
And with his reddened eyes rolling, the ten-necked one, 
gazing at that monkey, ordered his principal counsellor* 

* That the action of a Brahma mantra upon on* is nullified Some 
bound physically.— T. 




SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



i ©37 



boasting of high pedigree and noble character) (to 
interrogate the incomer). And by turns questioned by them 
as to his mission and purpose, as well as the fundamental 
occasion (of his inroad), that foremost of monkeys replied,— 
“A messenger, I come (from Sugriva.)*' 



SECTION XLIX. 



A ND struck with his* deed, that one of dreadful vigor, 
Hanum£n, his eyes reddened in wrath, steadily looked at 
the lord of Rakshas ; flaming in gorgeous and precious gold, 
with a splendid diadem studded with pearls ; (adorned 
with) excellent ornaments, containing diamonds and costly 
gems, — seeming to have been forged by the mind ; appareled 
in costly linen j smeared with red sandal paste, and 
beautifully painted with various and variegated devices ;+ 
looking splendid with his sightly yet terrible eyes ; having 
sheeny, sharp and long teeth, — with hanging lips ; — and 
that hero (saw) that one of great energy, radient with 
ten heads ; like unto Mandara with its summits containing 
serpents ; resembling a mass of blue collyrium ; with his 
breast graced by a chain ; with his countenance possessed of 
the lustre of the moon ; looking like a cloud beside the new- 
risen Sun ; with his dreadful arms bound with keyuras, and 
graced with excellent sandal paste, brilliant with angadas, 
and resembling five-headed serpents ; seated on a superb 
seat, — upon a spacious, variegated, and gay sheet embellished 
with crystals, and studded with gems ; ministered on all sides 
by gorgeously adorned damsels,bearing hair-furnished fans,— 
the strength-elated one surrounded by four Rakshas — his 

* Indrajit’s. — T. 

t e. g. the three horizontal marks painted on the forehead by Saivas and 
Sdktas.—T. 





1038 



RlMlYANA 



counsellors versed in the mystery of counsel,— viz., 
Durdhara, Prahasta,the Raksha Mah&p&rywa, and the minister 
Nikumbha, — like the entire world girt round by the four 
seas, — and encouraged by other counselors, fair of 

forms and versed in counsel, even like the sovereign of 
celestials by the celestials. And Hanum&n beheld the 
immensely energetic lord of R&kshasas surrounded (on all 
sides by his advisers), like a cloud containing water on a 
summit of Meru. And undergoing exceeding trouble at 
the hands of the Rakshas of dreadful prowess, (Hanum&n) 
struck with mighty amaze, gazed at the lord of Rakshas. 
And seeing the sovereign of Rakshas, appearing splendid, 
Hanum&n, bewildered by his effulgence, mentally reflected : 
“Ah ! the form ! Ah j the patience ! Ah ! the strength ! Ah ! 
the splendour ! Ah ! the entire auspiciousness of the king 
of R&kshasas ! If the lord of R&kshasas were not impious unto 
the height, this one could well be the protector themselves 
of the celestial regions with Sakra. But in consequence of 
the fell and remorseless acts of this one, which are the 
aversion of every one, all the worlds with gods and demons 
hold him in fear. This one, being angered, dares to convert 
this earth into one entire ocean.” Beholding the potency 
of the R&kshasa king of immeasurable prowess, the intelligent 
monkey thus indulged in a variety of thought. 



SECTION L. 



Seeing the tawney-eyed one staying before hiqi, the 
mighty-armed R&vana, affrighter of (the worlds), wai over- 
whelmed with fierce wrath. And gazing at that foremost of 
monkeys girt with power, and with his soul exercised with 
apprehension, he (thought), — “Is this the worshipful Nandi, 
come hither in person, by whom I, on my jeering at him, had 




SUNDA R 4 Kl NDA M . 1 039 

formerly been cursed in Kail&^a f* Or is this one wearing 
the shape of a monkey Vali's son, V&na ?” And with his 
eyes coppery with rage, the king asked his foremost 
counselor! Prahasta, in words fraught with sense and suiting 
the season, — “Ask this wicked-minded one, whence is he ? 
And what led him to ravage the grove, and what was his 
object in brow-beating the R&kshasas ? And what hath been 
his purpose in entering my metropolis incapable of being 
subdued ; and what for did he also fight (with my retainers ?) 
Do thou ask the wicked-minded one about this.” Hearing 
R&vana’s speech, Prahasta said,— “Take heart ! Fair fortune 
to thee ! Thou needst not be alarmed, O monkey. If thou 
hast been sent to R&vana’s residence by Indra, tell us truly 
everything. Let no fear, O monkey, be thine. Thou shalt 
be liberated. If thou belong to Vai9ravana, or to Yama, or 
to Varuna, and hast entered into this city of ours disguising 
(thy proper shape), — or if thou hast been despatched by 
Vishnu burning for victory, (tell us this truly). Thy prowess 
is certainly not that of a monkey, — thy form alone is that 
of a monkey. Unfold this (unto us) faithfully, — O monkey, 
and thou shalt get (back) thy liberty. But if thou shouldst say 
aught untruthful, thy life shall pay dear for it. Or tell us 
wherfore thou hast entered into R&vana’s mansion.” Thus 
addressed then, that foremost of monkeys said unto the lord 
of R&kshasas, — “I am not Sakra’s, nor Yama’s, nor Varuna's. 
I have no friendship with Dhanada,+ nor have I been des- 
patched by Vishnu. This is my race ; and I have come 
hither a monkey for obtaining a sight of the Rakshasa 
chief. And it is to attain a sight of the R&kshasa lord that I 
have destroyed his peerless grove ; and it is for this that, the 
powerful R&kshasas seeking for fight, I for the preservation 
of my person have resisted them in conflict. I am incapable 
of being slain with weapons even by the celestials and the 

* R&vana had formerly laughed at Nandi for his monkey-face.—' T. 

t Lit. — giver of wealth— a designation of Kuvera. — T. 





1040 



RAMXYaNa. 



Asuras themselves. This boon I also* happen to have 
received from the Great-father. It is because I was desirous 
of seeing the king that I have suffered this weapon to restrain 
me. Although the Riikshasas have brought me (hither thus), 
yet I am free from any weapon (restraining me). I come 
near thee on a certain business of R£ma. Knowing me for 
a messenger of R&ghava endowed with measureless prowess, 
do thou, O lord, listen to my words, calculated to work 
thy profit.” 



SECTION LI. 



Seeing the Ten-necked one of mighty energy, that 
foremost of monkeys, endued with strength, calmly spoke 
unto him words containing sense,”— I have come unto 
thee at the command of Sugriva, O lord of R£kshasas. Thy 
brother, the king of monkeys, enquires after thy welfare. 
Listen to the desire of thy brother, the high-souled Sugriva, 
and his words fraught with righteous sense and capable of 
working one’s good here and hereafter. King Dasaratha, 
master of cars and elephants and steeds, — is the friend of 
all like unto their father, and is furnished with the splendour 
of the sovereign of celestials. His eldest son, — mighty-armed, 
and masterful, the darling (of his sire), hath, in accordance 
with his father’s order, entered the forest of Dandaka with 
his brother Lakshmana and his wife Sita. His name is 
RSma, and he is exceedingly energetic, and ever abideth 
on the path of virtue. His spouse, the celebrated Sit&, 
daughter unto Vidcha, the high-souled king Janaka, either 
died or was carried off in Janasth&na. Seeking for that 
exalted lady, the king’s son, accompanied by his younger 
brother, arriving at Rhrishyamuka, met with Sugriva. And 



like thyself. 




SUNDARA KANDA M 



1041 



Sugriva promised that he would undertake the search for 
SitS, and R&ma (on his part promised) that he would confer 
on Sugriva the kingdom of the monkeys. And, thereupon, 
slaying Vali in battle, the king’s son established Sugriva 
as the lord of the monkeys. Thou formerly hast known 
that foremost of monkeys, Vali. That monkey was slain 
in battle by him (R&ma) with a single shaft. And, thereupon, 
the lord of monkeys, Sugriva, true to his vow, eager for 
searching SitSL, despatched monkeys in all directions. And 
thousands and hundreds and niyutas of monkeys are explor- 
ing all sides, below and above in the sky. And some are 
like Vinata’s offspring,* and some like the Wind ; their 
course is incapable of being resisted ; and those heroic 
monkeys are endued with strength and celerity. I, Hanumin 
by name, am the son of the Wind-god. For Sita, I, desirous 
of seeing her, have come hither, bounding over the main 
measuring a full hundred Yoyanas. And as I was roving, I 
came to see Janaka’s daughter in thy house. Thou art 
cognizant of righteousness and interest, and hast attained 
prosperity through thy asceticism. Therefore, O eminently 
wise one, thou ought not to confine another’s wife. Actions 
opposed to righteousness, and bringing on countless evils, 
and causing extermination, — ill become persons of thy sort. 
Who is there even among celestials and Asuras that is 
competent to stay before the shafts shot by Lakshmana and 
K&ma in wrath ? There is none, O king, in all the three 
worlds, that is capable of attaining ease, after inflicting 
injury on Righava. Treading the path of virtue and profit, 
do thou pay heed unto my speech fraught with good for 
three times ;+ and do thou return J&naki unto that fore- 
most of men. Seen have I this exalted lady, — which was 
difficult to compass. As for what remaineth to be done, 
R&ma himself shall bring it about. That Sit & I have beheld 



* Garura. — T. 

t Present, past, and future. — T. 





1042 



aAmA fa i\a. 



overwhelmed with grief, whom, albeit resembling a five- 
hooded serpent in thy mansion, thou knowst not. And 
even as food thoroughly mixed with poison, being taken, is 
incapable of being digested, this one is incapable of being sub- 
dued even by the celestials and Asiiras. It is not proper to 
destroy religious merit reaped by undergoing extreme 
mortification, as well as access of life (attained by the same 
means) * Thou deemst thyself by virtue of thy asceticism 
incapable of being destroyed by the celestials and Asuras ; 
and herein thy great merit (incident to thy austerities) is 
the cause. — But Sugriva is not a god or a Yaksha or a 
R&kshasa. RSghava, O king, is a mortal and Sugriva is 
the lord of monkeys. How canst thou, O king, save thy- 
life from them ? He that, confiding in his strength, comm itteth 
himself to foul proceedings, cannot count upon his righteous 
deeds, but his evil ones follow him. Virtue destroyeth vice, 
(yet vice like thine destroyeth all virtue).t Thou, without doubt, 
hast obtained the fruit of thy righteousness, and the fruit 
also of this iniquity thou shalt reap without delay. And 
taking to heart the carnage in Janasth&na and the slaying 
of Vali as well as the friendship of Rama with Sugriva, do 
thou understand thine own good. I, alone that I am, can at 
my will destroy Lanka with her steeds and elephants and 
cars ; but he whose envoy 1 am hath not yet decided on 
this point. Rama hath in presence of the tawny-eyed (ones) 
forsooth promised the annihilation of the foe by whom Sita 
hath been sore oppressed. On wronging Rima, Purandara 
himself cannot escape scot-free, —what shall Isay of persons 
like thee ? Her whom thou knowest as SitS staying in thine 
abode — know her for the Fatal Night that shall bring 
destruction down on all Lanka. Therefore, beware of thyself 
turning about thy neck the fatal noose in the shape of Sita ! 

* By such an iniquitous act as this. — T. 

t The parenthetical part is the commentator's filling in of the difficiency 
in the sentiment. — T. 




SUN DA RA RANDA M. 



1043 



Do thou rather study thy welfare. Thou shalt behold this 
city crowned with edifices and stalls, in flames fed by the 
wrath of Rama, and consumed by the energy of SitSL. Do 
not bring to destruction thine friends and ministers, and 
kindred, and brethren and sons, and thine entire welfare, — 
thine enjoyments and wives and this Lanka. O sovereign 
of the R&kshasas, do thou faithfully listen to these words 
of me, a monkey and the servant and envoy of Rama. 
Abolishing all the worlds with their creatures mobile 
and immobile objects, the illustrious R&ma is capable of 
creating these anew. Neither among celestials nor Asuras, 
Yakshas, Rakshas, nor serpents, Vidyadharas, NagSs, 
Gandharbas nor beasts, Siddhas, the foremost Kinnaras, 
nor all birds,— nowhere among any class of beings in all 
time breathes lie who can cope with Rama equal to Vishnu’s 
self in prowess. Having done such a wrong unto the 
foremost of ail creatures— even unto that lioil of a monarch, 
Rftma, thy life is in high peril. Neither deities nor Daityas, 
nor the foremost night-rangers, nor Gandharbas and 
Vidyidharas, nor Nagas, nor Yakshas, can stay in fight against 
Rama — the leader of these three worlds. And neither 
Brahma, self-create, having four countenances, nor the three- 
eyed Rudra, destroyer of Tripura, nor the august Indra, 
the generallissimo of the celestials, can stay in fight before 
Rkma. 1 ’ Hearing the distasteful yet excellent speech of the 
bold and matchless monkey, the ten-necked one, with his eyes 
whirling in wrath, ordered the destruction of that mighty 
monkey. 




1044 



it Am A r am a. 



SECTION Lit. 



FT EARING the words o( the high-souled monkey, Rftvana, 
bereft of his senses by wrath, ordered that he should be put to 
death. On the death of that one who had proclaimed his own 
position of being an envoy .having been ordered by the wicked- 
minded R&vana, Vibhishana did not agree (with the decision). 
And knowing that the lord of R&kshasas was wroth and that 
that affair* was at hand, Vibhishana, resolved to act aecording 
to justice, began to reflect as to what was to be done. 
Having arrived at a decision, that one skilled in speech, 
paying homage unto that conqueror of foes, his elder brother, 
spoke unto him in words eminently good, — “O lord of 
R&kshasas, forgive me and renounce thy wrath.f Extend 
thy favor unto me, and hear these words of mine. Lords of 
the earth, endowed with integrity and knowing high and 
low, never put messengers to death. The taking the 
monkey’s life, O king, is opposed to morality and repugnant 
to social usage ; and it is also unworthy of thyself. Thou 
understandst morality, art grateful and versed in the morality 
of sovereigns, and canst distinguish between high and low 
among beings, and even thou knowst the prime sense of 
things. If discerning persons like thee come under the govern- 
ance of passion, mere toil is the pains that are undergone to 
master the scriptures. Therefore, O destroyer of enemies, 
be pacified. O lord of R§kshasas, difficult to approach, 
consider what is proper or otherwise, and then do thou mete 
out punishment to the envoy.” Hearing Vibhishana’s speech, 
R&vana lord of Rakshasas, overcome with a mighty wrath, 
answered, — “O slayer of foes, to slay the sinful doth not 

* The destruction of Hanum&n. — T. 

f The commentator says, the passage means , — 'Give up thy promise (to slay 
Hanumdn) and abate thy anger. — T. 




SUNDA MA K\NDA At. 



1045 



cause sin. Therefore shall I slay this monkey, worker of 
iniquity.” Hearing these words grounded in unrighteousness, 
evil every way, and worthy of the base, that foremost of 
intelligent ones, Vibhishana, spoke words couching supreme 
import, — ‘*0 lord of Lank&, be propitious. O Sovereign of 
R&kshasas, listen to speech containing the significance of 
virtue and profit. O king, an envoy is not to be put to death 
on the occasion of his discharging his proper functions. 
This righteous people say everywhere unto all. Surely this 
is an overgrown enemy ; and he hath perpetrated immense 
injury (unto us). But say the good, envoys are not to be 
slain, albeit many are the punishments that have been 
assigned for messengers. Disfigurement of the body, stripes, 
shaving of the head,— one of these or all combined, — these 
are said to be the punishments that should be inflicted on 
envoys. But I have not heard of the punishment of death 
being a penalty of the envoy. Why doth one like thee, 
having one’s intelligence rendered meek as respects righteous- 
ness and profit, and capable of proceeding on certain 
decisions on the merits or otherwise of things, — come under 
the sway of passion f Those possessed of power never 
give way to anger. Neither in religious discussion, nor in 
social concerns, nor in appropriating the right sense of 
the scriptures, is there any that can approach thee, O hero. 
Verily thou art the foremost among celestials and Asuras. In- 
vincible to the gods and Asuras themselves gifted with 
prowess, high spirits and intelligence, thou hast in battle 
oftentimes put to the rout the chiefs of celestials and 
monarchs. Those heroes that have heretofore mentally 
entertained enmity against such a one as thou, foe of deities 
and Daityas, — heroic and valient and unconquerable, have 
not been deprived by thee of their lives.* Nor do I see any 



• There is a particle api t even , which stands in the way of this sloka fitting 
in with the context .—' 'Even those heroes who have mentally is a lame 




1046 



rAmA van a. 



good that may likely accrue to us from the slaying of this 
monkey. Let thy vengeance descend on those that have 
despatched the moukey. Whether honest or otherwise, this 
one hath been commissioned by others. Advocating interest 
not his own and identifying himself with another, an envoy 
doth not merit the being put to death. O king, if this one 
be slain, no other sky-ranger whatever would show himself 
unto us. Therefore, O captor of hostile capitals, do not seek 
to slay this one. Thou shouldst spend thyself on celestials 
with Indra (at their head). On his being killed, another see 
I not who, O thou that lovest warfare, can move those 
haughty sons of a king to take up arms against thee. And, 
O bringer-in of joy unto the heart, it is not proper for thee, 
invincible to celestials and Asuras gifted with prowess, high 
spirits and intelligence, to disappoint the Nairitas(as to their 
eagerness for encounter). They are devoted to thy good, 
and are heroic and intent on thy well-being, born in lines 
having high and fiery virtues, and endowed with intelligence, 
—the flower of those bearing arms— *nd have been main- 
tained by thee. Therefore let a portion of the forces, having 
received thy order, march to-day, and bring (hither) those 
foolish princes. It is meet that thou shouldst display thy 
prowess before foes. ,, Thereat, the lord of the night-rangers, 
that potent enemy of the celestials and the foremost of 
R&kshasa monarchs, lending free play to his intellect, 
accepted the excellent words of his younger brother. 



reason why Hanum&n, who had wronged R&vana so outrageously in overt 
acts, should be let off. — T. 





St/NDA RAKXNDA M. 



1047 



SECTION till. 



jtt EARING those words of his, the high-souled ten-necked 
>iie spoke unto his brother a speech consonant to season 
rod place,— ‘Properly hast thou spoken, — to slay a messenger 
6 improper. But let him be punished with any chastisement 
»ve slaying. Certainly the tail is a darling ornament to a 
nonkey. Therefore let his tail be set on fire anon ; 
rad this having been consumed, let him go away. Then 
shall his best friends and kindred and acquaintances see 
lim crest-fallen, with his person deformed. 11 And the lord 
>f R&kshasas ordered, -~“With his tail in flames, let this one 
>e taken all round Lank& containing terraces. 11 Hearing 
»is words, the R&kshasas, cruel through wrath, cover up his 
Hanumin's; tail with worn pieces of cotton cloth. Thereat, 
even as fire in a forest increaseth on getting dry fuel, the 
nighty monkey grew in dimensions on his tail being wrapped 
up. And having soaked (the cloth) in oil, they set fire to 
it. Thereat with his soul overpowered with rage and 
hatred, and his countenance like the risen sun, he lashed 
them with his flaming tail. And those — rangers of the 
night — those Rlkshasas— old and young and females — again 
bringing that foremost of monkeys, grew exceedingly glad. 
And that hero (being bound), entertained a purpose in 
harmony with the season. ‘'Albeit bound, the Rlkshasas 
rannot forsooth cope with me. Snapping these bonds, 1 
ihall, darting up, again slaughter these. Although agreeably 
to the mandate of their master these wicked-minded ones 
lave bound me, yet have they not been able to clear scores 
with me. I can slay all these R&kshasas in battle ; but I 
suffer this (maltreatment) for not marring the (pure delight) 
Rama shall derive from my deed.* I shall once more range 



* This, as interpreted by R&minuya ; but the sense is not satisfactory. 




1048 



RAM A YlNA . 



around Lanki. Let this be so. At night I could not satis- 
factorily examine the fortifications.* For certain, by me is 
to be beheld Lanki when night hath departed. Let them 
bind me anew. The Rikshasas pain me by setting fire to 
my tail ; but my mind doth not tire.” Then the Rikshasas, 
rejoicing greatly, went off, taking that mighty monkey 
endowed with strength, an elephant (in prowess) among, 
monkeys. And blowing conchs and trumpets, and bruiting 
it abroad by various actions,! those Rikshasas of cruel deeds 
took (Hanumin) about the city (of Lanki). And led by 
those Rikshasas, that subduer of enemies, Hanumin, experi- 
enced delight, and going about the mighty metropolis of 
the Rikshasas, the redoubted monkey surveyed variegated 
cars, enclosed court-yards, well-ordered terraces, streets 
thronged with edifices, crossings, by-ways, and the interiors | 
of dwellings. And on terraces and highways the Rikshasas | 
proclaim the monkey, saying, — "This is a spy." On 
Hanumin’s tail being in flames, Rikshasis of frightful eyes 
related unto that exalted lady! tidings of this great mishap. 
“O Siti, the copper-faced monkey with whom thou hadst 
held talk, is being led around with his tail flaming .; 9 Hearing 
these cruel words, like unto loss of life, Vaidehi, burning in 
grief, approached the Fire. And wishing for the welfare of the 
mighty monkey, that large-eyed lady with an intent mind I 
began to pray unto that bearer of sacrificial offerings, — 4, If 
I have served my lord, if I bear a character, if I have ascetic 
merit, if l have been the wife of one alone, then prove thou 
cool unto Hanumin." Thereat, as if communicating the 
welfare of the monkey unto that one having eyes like those 
of a young deer, the Fire flamed up, — and Hanumin’s sire, 

How Hanum&n’s resistance would have anywise marred R&ma's joy, is not 
easy to understand. — T. 

♦ Another meaning is : — Its places inacessible on account of works. — T. I 

f Publishing Hanum&n’s penalty. — T. I 

t SitA. — T. { 



SUNDARAKlNDAM. 



1049 



albeit furnished with fire and a tail, blew ice cold before that 
worshipful one, breathing health (unto Hanum£n). On his 
tail flaming, the monkey reflected, — “This fire is flaming. 
Why doth it not then burn me all over ? I see it of exceeding 
brightness, yet it paineth me not. (On the contrary), at the 
end of my tail it seemeth like a mass of ice. Or this is 
clearly due to Rama’s power, even like the wonder (that I 
witnessed) while bounding over the main — the mountain 
under the lord of streams.* If the Ocean and the intelligent 
Main&ka could show such regard for R§ma, what may not 
the Fire do (for him ?) Fire doth not burn me for Site's 
(absolute) goodness, for R&ghava’s prowess, and for (his) 
friendship with my sire.” Then the elephantine monkey 
again reflected for a while, — “Why should one like me 
suffer one’s self to be bound by vile R&kshasas ? Therefore 
it is meet that I should, displaying my prowess, avenge (this 
wrong).” Thereat that vehement and mighty monkey 
snapped his bonds, and furiously springing into the sky, the 
terrible monkey uttered a shout. And then the graceful son 
of the Wind-god arrived at the gate of the city resembling 
a hill, where Rakshas there were none. And after having 
attained the magnitude of a mountain, anon that self-controlled 
one diminished himself and cast off his bonds. And having 
freed himself, the graceful one again became mountain- 
like ; and eying around, he saw a bolt standing against the 
gate. And that mighty-armed one, the Wind-god's son, 
taking up that bolt of burnished iron, again slaughtered the 
guards. And having slain the warders, that one of terrific 
prowess crowned with a luminous wreath forged from his 
flaming tail, and appearing like the sun garlanded with glory, 
once again cast his eyes over LankSL. 



* Main&ka. — T. 




105 ° 



RAM A Y ANA. 



SECTION LIV. 



OUSTING his eyes on Lank&, the monkey, his wish 
attained, increasing his person and bursting with spirits, 
considered as to how to give the coup de grace to his 
exertions. “What recently is to be done by me here to finish 
this business, that may afflict them the more ? I have 
ravaged the wood, and slain the choice R&kshasas, and 
destroyed by main force a portion of the army. Now it 
remains to demolish the fortifications. On the fortifications 
being destroyed, my work shall have its toils crowned with 
joy. By undergoing slight labor in this business,I shall have 
my pains furnished with fruit. That bearer of sacrificial 
offerings* ‘who flameth on my tail,— it is my duty to 
propitiate him with these excellent edifices.” Thereat that 
mighty monkey, with his tail aglow, and resembling a cloud 
(luminous)with lightning, began to range before the dwellings 
in Lanki. And that monkey with a calm mind, eying (all 
round), ranged one house from another, and gardens, and 
stately piles. And that one gifted with exceeding vehemence, 
and in strength resembling the Wind, bounding up set fire 
unto the dwelling of Prahasta. Then HanumSn endowed 
with prowess, leaping up, set unto Mahaparywa's mansion 
fire resembling that at the universal dissolution. And (then) 
the mighty monkey darting up, set fire unto Vajradanshtra’s ; 
and (then) that highly energetic one set fire unto Suka's and 
unto the intelligent Sarana’s. And the leader of monkey 
bands in the same way burnt down Indrajit’s mansion ; and 
then he burnt the abodes of Sum&li and Jamvumali ; and 
Raymiketu’s mansion and Suryyacatru’s, and Hraswakarna’s, 
and the Rakshasa Romaya’s ; and the houses of Yuddhonmatta, 
and Matta, and the Rakshasa Dwajagriva, and the calm 



* Vide ante.— T. 





sundarikAndam. 



1051 



Vidyujjibhwa, and Hastimukha ; and of Karala, and of Vi9&la, 
and of Sonit&ksha ; and Kumbhakarna’s mansion, and 
Nikumbha’s, and the residence of Yajna9atru, and of 
Brahma9atru. And leaving alone the dwelling of Vibhishana, 
that exceedingly energetic one — foremost of monkeys — by 
and by burnt (all the houses there). And in those costly 
mansions and dwellings, that famous one, that foremost of 
monkeys, burnt all the wealth of those affluent persons.— 
Having passed the dwellings of all, that powerful and auspi- 
cious one approached the residence of the lord of RSikshasas, 
Rivana. And in that foremost of mansions, adorned with 
various gems, resembling Meru or Mandara, graced with 
diverse auspicious things, he set unto the same, fire 
flaming at the end of his tail. And the heroic HauumSn 
roars, resembling a cloud (appearing) at the end of a Yuga. 
And assisted by the wind, that highly powerful and vehement 
one (Fire) flaimed up, like fire at the wreck of all, and 
the fire attained energy. And the wind spreading the 
flaming fire all round those dwellings, those mansions 
furnished with golden networks ; and containing pearls and 
gems ; enjewelled and magnificent, were shorn of their 
splendour. And cracked edifices began to topple down to 
the ground, like the mansions of Siddhas falling from the 
Armament on the exhaustion of their righteousness. And 
there arose a mighty uproar of those R£kshasas, as, bereft 
of their good fortune, despairing of preserving their abodes, 
they rushed in afl directions, — “Forsooth it is Fire himself 
that hath come hither in the form of a monkey.” And 
females crying with babes on their breasts, suddenly plunged 
(into the fire). And some fair ones with hair dishevelled, 
and surrounded on all sides with fire, as they fell down from 
dwellings, looked lovely like lightning from the welkin. 
And he (Hanumkn) saw various kinds of metals, mixed with 
diamonds, and coral, and lapises and pearls and silver, run- 
vng down in streams from the mansions. And as Fire is not 




rXmXyana 



1052 

cloyed with wood and straw, Hanum&n never at all felt 
satiety on slaying those foremost of R&kshasas. And the 
Earth could not contain the R&kshasas slain by Hanum&n. 
And as Rudra had burnt down Tripura, the vehement and 
high-souled monkey, Hanum2n, burnt down Lankft. And 
rising to the brow of Lanka's mount,* the fire of terrific 
energy kindled by the impetuous Hanum&n, spread wide 
his tongues. And with the Wind assisting him, the smokless 
Fire in the dwellings, with his flames feeding on the bodies 
of the R&kshasas representing sacrificial offerings, spread 
his magnitude, touching the horizen — resembling the con- 
flagration kindled at the universal dissolution. And possess* 
ing the fierce energy of a koti suns, the mighty Fire 
completely encompassing the entire Lank&, increased (in 
volume), riving the mundane Egg with various sounds 
resembling thunder-claps. And the Fire of terrific might, 
having his flames resembling Ktnguka blossoms, rising up to 
the sky, clouds caused by volumes of smoke arising from 
extinguished fire, in hue resembling blue lotuses, looked 
exceedingly beautiful. “Either the thunder-bolt-bearing 
Indra the Great — chief of celestials, or Yama himself, or 
Varuna, or the Wind-god, or the Fire generated by Rudra 's 
third eye, or the Sun, or Dhanada, or Soma. This is no 
monkey, — this is verily Kdla\ himself. Or is this the 
R&kshasa-annihilating Fire of Brahm& himself — the Great- 
sire of all, the four-faced Disposer of the world’s destinies,— 
come hither, wearing the form of a monkey? Or is this 
Vishnu’s Energy, inconceivable, unutterable, infinite and sole, 
and of surpassing power, — now come hither in its own 
illusory nature, assuming a monkey-form ?'* Seeing that city 
suddenly consumed, with her souls, dwellings, and trees, 
R&kshasas of note, assembled together, thus talked unto each 
other. And then LankS, suddenly consumed with R&kshasas, 

* Trikuta on which Lanki rested.— T. 

t A name of Yama. — T. 




SUNDARA KlNDAM 



*053 



horses, cars, serpents, crowds of birds, beasts and trees, began 
to bewail tumultuously and loud in forlorn guise, — "0 
father I O son ! O love ! O friend J O lord of my life and 
frame 1 all our religious merit is abolished.” Indulging in 
various lamentations, the Rakshas thus created a mighty and 
frightful uproar. And with the flames encircling her, and 
her foremost heroes fallen, and her warriors destroyed, 
Lank&, overcome by the might of Hanum£n’s wrath, became 
as if she had been blighted by an imprecation. Then the 
mighty-minded Hanumin beheld the R&kshasas in terror and 
trepidation and castdown, and Lankl marked by fire and 
bright flames, even as the Self-sprung eyeth the world destroyed 
by his rage. And devastating the forest filled with many 
excellent trees, slaying many a terrible R&kshasa in conflict, 
and burning down the city of Lank£ filled with picturesque 
houses, the monkey, Hanum£n, Wind-god's son, stationed 
himself there. And destroying many a R&kshasa, felling 
many trees in the forest and setting fire to the houses of the 
RSkshasas, the high-souled (monkey) became engaged in 
thoughts touching R&ma. Thereupon all the celestials 
praised highly the high-souled, excellent and mighty' son of 
the Wind-god, foremost of heroic monkeys, gifted with the 
velocity of the Wind. And all the celestials^ the foremost 
ascetics, the Gandharbas , the Vidhyddharas , the Pannagas , 
and all other great heroes, attained excess of delight. And 
having devastated the forest, slain the Rikshasas in conflict 
and burnt the grand city of LankSL, the great monkey appear- 
ed there. And seated on the variegated top of a splendid and 
high mansion, the foremost of monkeys, spreading the rays of 
his burning tail, looked like unto the sun of many rays. And 
having consumed the city of LankSL, the great monkey 
juenched the fire of his tail in the ocean. Thereupon 
beholding LankS. burnt down, the celestials along with 
Gandharbas, Siddhas, and the great ascetics, were struck 
with wonder. 




1054 



rAmAfana. 



SECTION LV. 



Beholding Lank5 burnt down and devastated and the 
demons terrified, the monkey Hanuman began to reflect. And 
worked up with fear and remorse, he reflected, -“What a mighty 
iniquity have I perpetrated by burning down Lanka of my own 
accord ? Blessed are those high-souled ones who control their 
wrath by dint of their own good sense,like unto fire quenched 
by water. What iniquity is there which cannot be perpetrated 
by the angry ? They can even slay the worshipful and vilify 
the pious with harsh words. The angry cannot decide what 
should be spoken and what not. There is no vice which 
cannot be committed by them, and there is nothing which 
cannot be spoken by them. He is the proper person who can 
subdue his rising ire by means of forgiveness as a serpent 
leaves off his worn skin. O fie on me who am vicious-minded, 
shameless and the perpetrator of a mighty iniquity. Not 
thinking of Sit5, I have slain my master with fire. Forsooth 
hath the worshipful J&naki been burnt, since the whole city of 
LankS. hath been devastated with fire. And she being burnt, 
foolishly have I spoilt the work of my master. I have defeated 
the great object for which I have laboured so much. In burn- 
ing down Lanka, I have not saved Sita. To have burnt down 
Lanka is assuredly a trifle, but in my ire I have lost my great 
object. Forsooth hath janaki been consumed, since I behold 
no spot in Lanka which is not made desolate with fire — 
in fact the whole city hath been reduced to ashes. As I have 
committed such an injury under the influence of my perverse 
understanding, it behoveth me to relinquish my life here. I 
shall jump into this flame or into a submarine fire, or I shall 
resign my mortal frame to the animals that infest the ocean. 
For, living, I shall not be able to face that lord of monkeys, 
and how shall I, having spoilt their work utterly, show myself 




SUNDARA KIND AM. 



1055 



unto those foremost of men ? I have through my culpable 
passion furnished an ’.illustration of the reckless monkey- 
nature, which is well known over the three worlds. Fie on 
this activity, born of (the quality of) passion, which is the 
source / of incompetence and rashness ; since although capable, 
I did not protect Site. On Sit 3. having met with destruction, 
both of them* shall cease to exist ; and on their ceasing to 
exist, Sugriva shall die along with his friends. And hearing 
these tidings, how shall the righteous Bharata, attached unto 
his brother (R&ma), along with Satrughna, live ? And on 
the virtuous Ikshwaku race being extinct, without doubt, all 
the subjects shall be overwhelmed with grief. Therefore, 
I of curst luck hath had my harvest of virtue and profit 
taken away; and being under the influence of baleful passion, 
I am the cause of the destruction of creatures.” As he was 
reflecting thus, he bethought him of auspicious omens which 
he had witnessed since. “Or it may be that one of charming 
limbs hath been preserved by her proper energy. The 
blessed one may not have met with her end, for fire doth 
burn fire. And Fire should not touch the spouse of that 
virtuous one of immeasurable energy, — who is protected by 
by her own character. And that bearer of sacrificial offerings 
hath not burnt me, is owing to Rama’s power and the virtue 
of Vaidehi. And why should she that is a very goddess unto 
the three brothers, Bharata and the others, and that hath 
enchanted the mind of R&ma, meet with destruction ? And 
when that everywhere unspent Lord, having burning for 
his office, hath not consumed my tail, why shoud he burn the 
exalted lady ?” Then Hanum&n with wonder again thought 
of the sight of the golden mountain under the water, t “By 
virtue of her asceticism, veracity, and devotion unto her lord, 
she it is that can consume Fire, but Fire cannot burn her." 

* Rima and Lakshmana. — T. 

t Remembering the incident of his seeing the mountain Mainika through 
Sitd, Hanumdn was put in mind of Site’s superhuman power.— T. 





1056 



RAMAYaNa. 



And as Hanum&n was thinking of the magnitude of that 
revered lady's religious merit, he heard the converse there 
of high-souled Ch&ranas. “Ah ! hard is the feat that 
Hanum&n hath forsooth achieved. He hath created a terrific 
and fierce conflagration in the abode of the Raksha. The 
females of Rakshas accompanied by boys and old folks, are 
flying amain ; and in consequence of the hubbub it seems as 
if (Lank&) is in lamentation through her mountain-caverns. 
Burnt is this city of Lank& with her turrets, walls and gate- 
ways ; and we are astonished that j£naki is not burnt .' 1 
These words resembling ambrosia Hanum&n heard (at that 
time) ; and his mind was filled with joy. And what through 
the auspicious omens that he had witnessed, and what 
through the speech of the saints, Hanurain was delighted 
(beyond measure). Then the monkey, with his end attained, 
knowing that the king's daughter was unhurt, became bent 
upon returning after seeing her once again. 



SECTION LVI. 



Then seeing Janaki seated at the foot of the Sinsapa 
tree, (Hanumkn) saluting her said, — “By luck it is that I see 
thee unhurt." Then eying him again and again as he was 
on the point of departing, Sit£ said unto Hanumkn in words 
informed with affection for her husband, — “If, my child, it 
liketh thee, do thou, O stainless one, stay here today in 
some retired spot. To-morrow having refreshed thyself, thou 
shalt set out. Thy vicinity, O monkey, for a while beguiles 
me of slender luck of my measureless grief. Thou wilt go, 
O powerful monkey ; but ere thou return, it is, O foremost 
of monkeys, doubtful whether I shall live. And, O hero, 
the nut seeing thee shall try me sorely, who have fallen from 




SUNnARAKANDAM. 



1057 



one misfortune into a greater one, and who, my mind 
distracted, have been exercised by sorrow. And, O hero, 
this mighty doubt is (ever) present before me. How shall 
that exceedingly powerful one or that host of monkeys or 
' those two sons of that man of men, albeit backed by mighty 
I monkeys, cross over' the ocean incapable of being crossed ? 
Three beings have the power to bound over the deep 
Vinat&’s offspring, thou, and the Wind-god. Then in this 
business at hand hard to accomplish, what means dost thou, 
versed in business, see, whereby the end may be attained ?— 
O slayer of hostile heroes, thou alone art quite competent 
to perform this task ; and thou shalt attain fame through thy 
rising prowess. But if blocking up Lanka with his forces, 
that afflictor of enemies, Kakutstha, taketh me (from hence,) 
then that shall be worthy of him. — Therefore do thou so 
order things that that powerful and high-souled hero 
in conflict, may act as becomes himself.” Hearing 
her resonable, affectionate and pregnant speech, that 
hero, HanumSn, answered, — ”0 noble lady, that lord and 
foremost of monkeys, Sugriva gifted with strength, is 
determined on thy behalf. And that master of monkeys, 
Sugriva, O Vaidehi, surrounded by thousands and Kotis 
of monkeys, shall speedily come here (for the purpose). 
And those best of men, those heroes, Rama and Lakshmana, 
coming together, shall afflict Lanka with their arrows. And 
slaughtering the Rakshasa with his own adherents, Raghu's 
son, O exceedingly fair one, shall ere long take thee back to 
his palace. — O gentle damsel.do thou console thyself. Remain, 
expecting the hour. Soon shalt thou see Ravana slain in battle 
by Rama. On the lord of Rakshasas being slain along with 
his sons, councilors, and friends, thou shalt meet with Rama 
as Rohini meeteth with the Moon. At once shall Kakutstha 
come, ’accompanied by the foremost of monkeys, — who, 
conquering (Ravana) in conflict, shall remove thy grief.” 
Having thus consoled Videha’s daughter, Hanuman, son unto 




1058 



XAA/AVaNj. 



the Wind-god, setting his heart upon departure, saluted 
Vaidehi. And having soothed Vaidehi, and displayed his 
surpassing strength, having rendered the* city disconsolate, 
and baffled R&vana, exhibited his terrific might, and saluted 
Vaidehi, HanumSLn became bent upon returning, crossing over 
the mid-sea. Then that repressor of foes, the powerful 
monkey, anxious to see his master, ascended Aristha, fore- 
most of mountains ; (as if covered) with a sheet consisting 
of blue woods of tall padmakas , and clouds lying in the 
interspace between peaks,— and displayed from love by the 
glad light of the Sun ; appearing to be beholding with the 
minerals scattered about serving for its eyes ; seeming to be 
reciting aloud in consequence of the solemn sound of waters, 
to be carolling clearly through its many fountains, and to stay 
with uplifted arms by means of devadarus ; appearing to be 
crying distressfully on account of cascades sounding all round ; 
seeming to be trembling in consequence of verdant autumnal 
woods waving, and to be piping on account of kichakas 
vocal through the breeze ; eloquent ; with the foremost 
poisonous serpents appearing to be sighing forth ire ; 
appearing to be sunk in contemplation on account of caverns 
covered with snow and looking solemn in consequence ; 
as if moving about by means of hills looking like 
its cloud-legs ; seeming to yawn in the sky with peaks 
towering heavenwards, — scattered with summits, and graced 
with innumerable caves $ surrounded with sdlas t palms, 
tamalasy Karnas, and bamboos ; graced with spreading and 
flowering underwoods ; abounding in various beasts, and 
decked with mineral streams, — containing numerous rills, — 
thronged with collections of crags ; frequented by Maharshis, 
and Yakshas, and Gandharbas and Kinnaras and serpents ; 
impracticable in consequence of plants and trees ; with 
caverns harbouring lions ; * filled with tigers and other 
(ferocious beasts) j and furnished with trees having tasteful 
fruits and roots. And the Wind-god's offspring— foremost of 




SUNDA RAKXNDA M. 



1059 



r 



monkeys — ascended that mountain. Atid on the lovely level 
of that mountain, the crags, crushed with sounds under the 
tread of that one burning to behold RSLma and wrought up 
with excess of joy, were scattered all round. And ascending 
that lordly hill, the mighty monkey magnified himself, 
desirous of going from the southern to the northern shore 
of the salt waters. And getting to the top of the mountain, 
that hero, son unto the Wind-god, cast his eyes upon the 
dreadful main inhabited by terrible snakes. And that 
foremost of monkeys, offspring of the Wind-god,* (mentally) 
went from the south to the north, as if it were the air. And 
then that best of mountains, sore pressed by the monkey, 
began to emit cries, and with various creatures (on it), entered 
underneath the Earth, with its peaks tottering and its trees 
toppling. And borne down by the violence of his thighs, 
trees bearing flowers, being shattered, as if destroyed by 
Sakra’s weapon, fell to the ground. And the dreadful yells 
of mighty lions in pain, inhabiting caves, entered the ear, 
piercing the heavens. And VidySdharis .with their attires 
falling off and their ornaments disordered, suddenly rose 
from the mountainf unto the sky. And exceedingly powerful 
and mighty snakes of virulent venom, — having flaming 
tongues, with their hoods and necks tortured, began to roll 
(on the earth). And Kinnars and serpents, Gandharbas, 
Yakshas and Vidy&dharas, forsaking that foremost of 
mountains in affliction, took refuge in the sky. And that 
graceful mountain also, tormented by that powerful one, 
entered the nether regions with its tall trees and summits. 
And that mountain, which (heretofore) had measured ten 
yoyanas in area and thirty in height, became level with the 
earth. And desirous of crossing over the salt waters, with 

* Mdruta — this term is used twice in this sloka, once for Hanum&n, and 
next for the Wind-god. One of these is left out on the score of redun- 
dancy. — T. 

t Dharanidhardt. — ab . — from the holder of the Earth, the latter being 
supposed to rest on a mountain. — T. 





io6o 



RlMAYANA. 



their shores menaced by sounding (waves), the monkey rose 
to the sky. 



SECTION LVII. 



^AuND springing up like unto a winged hill, that one 
endowed with energy, the untiring HanumSn, began to swim 
on the ocean of the firmament having for its blown lotuses and 
lilies, snakes, Yakshas and Gandharbas ; with the Moon for 
its comely Kumuda ;* and with the Sun for its Kdrandavas ; 
charming to behold ; having Tishya and Sravana for its 
swans, clouds for its mosses and grass, Punarvasu for its 
mighty fish, the red-bodied one + for its huge aquatic animal, 
Air&vata for its spacious island, Swati for its sportive 
swan, breezes for its billows, and moonlight for its cool 
waters. And as if swallowing up the welkin and touching 
the lord of stars, abolishing the sky decorated with stars and 
the solar disc, and cleaving the clouds, the unfatigued 
Hanuman began to cross over that sea. And (on all sides) 
mighty masses of clouds, sable, crimson, blue, Mangis- 
tha-hued, and green-red, looked exceedingly beautiful. And 
now entering into clouds and now imerging from them, he, 
again and again becoming visible and lost to sight, looked 
like the Moon. And that one clad in white raiment, coursing 
through diverse clouds, the hero's body was (alternately) 
visible and invisible, like unto the Moon in the sky. And 
the Wind-god's son went on in the sky, scattering the clouds 
and descending again and again. And sending up mighty 
sounds, that exceedingly energetic one gifted with a power- 
ful voice like that of the clouds, having slain the foremost 
Rakshasas and rendered his name famous, having filled the 



♦ Lily. — T. 
t Bh&ma.— T. 





SUN DA RA KlNDA M. 



1061 



city with lamentations and afflicted Ravana, having distressed 
the mighty heroes and paid obeisance unto Vaidehi, — again 
held his course along the mid-ocean. And touching 
Main&ka — foremost of mountains — that one endowed with 
prowess proceeded amain like an iron dart let go from a 
string. And from a distance approaching and beholding that 
mighty mountain, Mahendra, resembling clouds, that 
redoubted monkey began to roar. And having a lusty voice 
resembling that of clouds, that monkey, roaring, filled all 
quarters with his lofty shouts. And arriving at that place, 
he, eager to behold his friends, emitted tremendous roars, 
and began to flourish his tail. And as he went on roaring 
in the path ranged by Suparna, the firmament with the solar 
disc seemed to be rent by his shouts. And (it came to 
pass that) those powerful and heroic (monkeys) that hid 
formerly stationed themselves on the northern shore of the 
ocean, anxious to see the Wind-god’s offspring, heard the 
sounds proceeding from Hanumin’s vehement speed, resem- 
bling the rumbling of clouds agitated by the winds. And 
all those rangers of woods, (staying) dispirited, heard the 
roars of that foremost of monkeys, like unto the roaring of 
rain-pouring clouds. And hearing those sounds as he kept 
crying, those monkeys (sitting) around, eager to see their 
friend, became extremely anxious. And that best of 
monkeys, Jambavin, with a joyful heart addressing all the 
monkeys, said,— “Hanuman hath succeeded completely. 
There is no doubt about this. If he were unsuccessful, he 
would not utter shouts as these.” And hearing the sounds 
produced by the violent movements of the arms of that high- 
souled (hero), as well as the shouts of that magnanimous one, 
the monkeys, filled with delight, leapt up on all sides. And 
they, eager to have a sight of Hanuman, joyfully went from 
mountain-top to mountain-top and from peak on to peak. 
And influenced by joy, the monkeys remained holding a 
bough at the top of a tree, and waving their clean 




1062 



jr Am Ay a na 



apparels. And as the wind roareth in a cavern, roared the 
powerful Hanum&n, son unto the Wind-god. And seeing 
that mighty monkey resembling a mass of clouds, alighting, 
those monkeys stood joining their hands. And then the 
vehement monkey resembling a hill, having leapt up from 
that mountain, alighted on the top of that (other) mountain* 
filled with trees. And bursting with delight, (Hanuman) 
dropped near a fountain, like unto a hill whose wings have 
been clipped. Then with joyful hearts, all the principal 
monkeys stood encircling the high-souled Hanum&n. And 
surrounding him, they experienced excess of delight, and 
drew near the newcomer with joyful faces. And bring- 
ing fruits and roots, the monkeys honored that chief of 
monkeys, the offspring of the Wind-god. And some, filled 
with delight, sent shouts, and some raised ululations ; and 
the foremost monkeys fetched branches of trees.f And that 
mighty monkey, Hanum&n, saluted his superiors and the aged, 
headed by J&mbavan ; as well as Prince Angada. And 
honored by the monkeys, as he very well deserved to be, 
and gratified by them, (he) briefly said — “Seen have I the 
exalted lady.” And taking Vali’s son by the hand, he sat 
him down in a charming tract of the woodland belonging 
to the mountain Mahendra. — Then asked (by them), 
HanumSin addressed those foremost monkeys, — “I have seen 
Janaka's daughter in the A$oka woods. That blameless 
one is guarded by dreadful Rakshasis. The girt weareth a 
single braid of hair, and burneth to attain a sight of R&ma. 
She is faint in consequence of fasting, and dirty, weareth 
matted locks and is emaciated.” Hearing the words, “I 
have seen” from the Wind-god’s offspring resembling 
ambrosia, all the monkeys were filled with rejoicing. And 
thereupon, some of mighty ones roared, and some shouted, 
and some blustered, and some raised ululations, and others 

* Mahendra.— T. 

f To serve for a seat for Hanumin.— ' T. 





SUNDA RA KlN DA 31. 



1063 



stormed (in return). And some elephantine monkeys in joy 
upraised their tails, and some lashed with their long and 
broad tails. And others, transported with joy, bounding up 
to the mountain-summit, touched that foremost of monkeys, 
the handsome Hanum&n. And when Hanum&n had ended, 
Angada said these excellent words in the midst of the heroic 
monkeys,- — “There is none, O monkey, that is like unto 
thee in strength and prowess. As having bounded over the 
spacious main, thou hast come back (here), thou art, O 
excellent monkey, the only giver of our lives. By thy 
grace it is that, our end attained, we shall meet with 
R&ghava. Oh for thy fidelity ! Oh for thy prowess j Oh 
for thy fortitude ! By luck hast thou seen that exalted 
one, the illustrious wife of R£ma, by luck it is that Kakutstha 
shall forego his sorrow in .consequence of separation from 
SitSL” Then surrounding Angada,Hanuman, and J£mbav£n, 
the monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, sat down upon a spacious 
stone. And having sat them down on the spacious rock, 
the monkeys became eager to hear of the bounding of the 
main and of (Hanum^n's) seeing Lanka, SitSL and R£vana. And 
they stood with joined hands.looking wistfully into Hanum£n’s 
face. And the graceful Angada was there, surrounded by 
many monkeys, and honored by them, even as the lord of 
celestials is honored in heaven by the ceietials. When the 
famous and renowned Hanuman, and Angada with bracelets 
on his arms, had sat down, the elevated and mighty mountain- 
summit was illuminated with splendour. 




1064 



RlMlFANA. 



SECTION Lvill. 

^ 9 ^ 

Then on the summit of the mountain, Mahendra, those 
powerful monkeys, headed by Hanum&n, rejoiced exceedingly. 
And when the high-souled delighted monkeys had sat them 
down, Jamvaban, glad at heart, asked that offspring of the 
Wind, the happy HanumSn, all about his proceeding : “How 
hast thou seen the worshipful one? How doth she fare 
there ? And how doth the cruel Ten-necked one bear him- 
self towards her ? Do thou truthfully relate all this unto us, 
O mighty monkey. How couldst thou track the exalted 
lady ? And what did she say in reply (to thy querries)? 
Having learnt the real state of things, we shall decide what 
is to be done. And do thou also tell us what we, repairing 
there, shall unfold unto that one of controled self and what 
we shall keep to ourselves.” Thus directed by him, that 
one (Hanuman) with his down standing on end, bowing down 
the head unto that revered one, Sit5, replied, — “In your 
sight, I bounded up with a concentrated mind, eager to reach 
the southern shore of the ocean. As I voyaged on, a great 
impediment occurred in the way. I saw a goodly and noble 
golden peak, standing, obstructing my way. I found the 
mountain as an obstacle to my course. Nearing the grand 
and splendid golden mount, I thought within myself, — ‘I will 
rive this.* And the sun-like summit of that mighty mountain, 
Prahasta, was cleft in a thousand fragments by my tail. 
Seeing his own condition, that mighty mountain, gladdening 
my heart, addressed me with the sweet speech, — ‘O son, 
know me for thy uncle. I am a friend unto the Wind,— 
famed as Mainaka, and living in the great deep. Formerly 
all the foremost mountains were furnished with wings. And 
(once on a time) they began to range the earth at will, 
committing devastations. Hearing of the conduct of the 




w 



SlNDARAKkNDAM. io 6 s 

mountains, that possessor of the six kinds of riches, Indra 
the Great, the swayer of Paka, with his thunderbolt cut off 
by thousands the pinions of the mountains. At that time, 
my sou, I, having been delivered by thy sire, the high-souled 
Wind-god, was cast into the abode of Varuna. O repressor 
of foes, I shall have to assist Raghava. Rlma is the fore- 
most of the righteous, and possessed of prowess like that of 
Mahendra himself.’ Having heard this from the magnani- 
mous Main&ka, I apprised the mountain of my mission, and 
my thoughts held their course. Having given me his per- 
mission, the magnanimous Mainaka, the mountain that had 
put on the form of a man, vanished, and, assuming his 
mountain-form, went into the vast sea. And I, summoning 
my best celerity, began to journey the remainder of my way. 
And having swiftly proceeded long in the path, I saw the 
exalted lady, Surasa, mother of the serpents. And that 
worshipful one stationed in the sea, said, — ‘By the celestials 
hast thou, O best of monkeys, been assigned as my food. 
Therefore shall I eat thee up. Thou hast been ordained as 
mine by the gods.’ Thus addressed by Surasa, I, remaining 
in humble guise with joined hands, and with my countenance 
turned pale, I uttered these words, — ‘Rama, the graceful 
son of Da9aratha, repressor of foes — hath entered the woods 
of Dandaka, in company with his brother Lakshamana and 
Sita. His wife Sita hath been carried off by the wicked 
Ravana. At Rama’s mandate I go to her as an envoy. In 
this business, thou, O chaste one, shouldst help Rama. Or 
having seen MithiUL's daughter, as well as Rama of untiring 
deeds, I shall come to thy mouth, — this I promise unto thee 
truly.’ Thus accosted by me, Surasa, wearing forms at her 
will, said, — ‘None is able to escape me. Even this is the 
boon that I have received.’ Having been thus addressed 
by Surasa, I attained the magnitude of ten yoyanas ; and then 
anon I dilated to another ten. But she opened her mouth 
wider than my magnitude. Seeing her stretched mouth, I 



*34 




RAMlYkNA. 



io$6 

again diminished myself, and on the instant again reduced 
myself to the measure of a thumb. And speedily entering her 
mouth, I immediately came out. Then the exalted Surasa 
again spoke unto me in her native shape, — ‘Thy end having 
been attained, go, O mild one, O foremost of monkeys, 
according to thy pleasure. Bring about the meeting of 
Vaidehi with the high-souled Raghava. Be thou blessed, O 
mighty-armed one. I am well pleased with thee, O monkey.’ 
Then I was praised by all beings, with, — 'Excellent !’ 
‘Excellent !’ Then like unto Garura I again sprang up into 
the air. But now my shadow was overtaken by somebody, 
though I saw no one. And my velocity being deprived, I 
looked at the ten cardinal points ; but I found there naught 
which could deprive me of my speed. Then I thought,— 
‘What is this obstacle that hath suddenly arisen in respect 
of my course? No form find I here?’ And as I stood 
aggrieved, my glance fell downwards. Then I saw there a 
dreadful R&kshasi supine on the flood. And laughing 
(scornfully), that grim one said these inauspicious words 
unto me, who was inert, although undaunted, — “Whither 
art thou bound, O thou of a gigantic body ? Desired by 
me, who am hungry, do thou becoming my food, gratify this 
body deprived of diet for a long time.’ Saying, ‘Well/ I 
accepted her speech, increasing my body at will more 
than the capacity of her mouth ; and her huge and 
dreadful mouth extended wide to eat me up. She did not 
understand me ,* nor that I had altered my shape. Then in 
the twinkling of an eye contracting my vasty shape, I, 
extracting her heart, darted into the sky. Thereat, throwing 
about her arms, that terrific one dropped into the salt waters. 
On that chaste one, resembling a hill, having her heart torn, 

I heard the meek speech of magnanimous persons, who had 
come there of themselves, — ‘This dreadful Rikshasi, 
Sinhika, hath been swiftly slain by HanumSn.’ Having 

* Understand that I was able to assume any shape at pleasure.— T. 





SUN DA R A KIND A M. 



1067 

slain her, I again, remembering the delay that had occurred 
touching my work, set out on the great road, and at length 
saw the southern shore of the sea, covered with mountains ; 
where is situated the city of Lanki. On the sun having set, 
I entered the city of the R&kshasas— their home — unnoticed 
by the RAkshasas of terrific vigor. I had entered in when a 
certain female casting forth violent laughter, and wearing 
the splendour of clouds at the end of a Kalpa, presented 
herself before me. And striking with my left clenched fist 
that exceedingly dreadful (form), having flames for her hair, 
who had sought to take my life, — and vanquishing her (thus), 
I entered (Lanka) at dusk. Then that one affrighted 
addressed me, saying, — ‘I, O hero, am, the city of LankA. 
Vanquished have I been by thy prowess. Thou shalt 
everywhere conquer all the R&kshasas’. There I wandered 
all the night (seeking for Janaka’s daughter) and (at 
length) entered RAvana’s inner apartment ; but that one 
of a Diity waist I found not. And not finding SitA in 
RAvana’s abode, I was cast in a sea of sorrow : nor found I 
how to cross over it. And as I was sorrowing, I saw a 
mansion with a charming grove encircled by a wall of 
excellent gold. And leaping over the wall, I saw a grove 
rife with trees ; and (at last) saw iu the midst of an agoka 
woodf a great Singapd. And ascending the tree, I saw a golden 
tract of plantains ; and hard by from the Singapd tree I 
espied that transcendentally beautiful one, dark-blue, having 
eyes resembling lotus-petals, with her face faded in conse- 
quence of fasting, clad in the same single piece of cloth, her 
hair covered with dust, — her limbs emaciated by the heat 
of sorrow and grief, — SitA, ever engaged in the welfare of 
her lord ; surrounded by cruel and deformed RAkshasis 
living upon blood and flesh, — like unto deer environed by 
tigresses. And I managed too swiftly to present myself 
before that one, menaced momentarily in the midst of the 
RAkshasis, wearing a single braid of hair; woe-begone; 




io68 



rAmAfana. 



ever thinking of her lord ; her limbs discolored by lying 
down on the ground, like unto a lotus on the approach of 
winter,— having eyes resembling those of a young deer, who 
had turned her face away from all the enjoyments offered 
by RSvana, and who had resolved to put a period to her 
existence. Seeing that lady the illustrious wife of R£ma in 
that condition, I seeing her remained even on that Singapd 
tree. Then I heard in Ravana’s mansion loud and solemn 
sounds mixed with the tinklings of zones and bangles. There- 
at exceedingly agitated, I changed my proper shape ; and 
remained like a bird in a dark part of the Singapd tree. Then 
the wives of R&vana along with R&vana himself of 
exceeding strength came to that place where Sit§ was. And 
seeing the lord of RSkshasas the exceedingly beauteous 
SitS contracted her thighs and covered her full breasts with 
her arms. And seeing Sita flurried and extremely excited 
and. casting about her gladness up and down, not finding any 
relief and trembling forlorn, the Ten-necked one said unto 
her undergoing extreme anguish, — “Without saying any- 
thing, I fall down (here). O fair one, do thou regard roe. 
If, O haughty one, thou do not honor me from pride of heart, 
I shall, O Sita, two months hence, see thy blood. ,, Hearing 
these words of the wicked Ravana, SitS, growing exceeding 
wroth, spoke these excellent words, — “O worst of Rakshasas, 
having used improper speech towards the wife of R£ma of 
measureless prowess, and the daughter-in-law of Da^aratha, 
lord of the Ikshwaku line, why hast thou not thy tongue 
fallen off ? Fie upon the prowess of thee that, O wretch, 
hast carried me off while my husband was away ; and not 
being seen of that high-souled one. Thou art never like 
R&ma, — thou art not even fit to be his slave. Raghava is 
invincible, truthful, heroic and (even) hungering for warfare." 
Thus addressed in harsh speech by Janaki, the Ten-necked 
one flamed up in wrath, like Fire in a funeral pyre. And 
with his wicked eyes whirling in rage, he raised the clenched 




SUNDAR i KIND AM. 



1069 



r 



fist of his right hand to slay Mkhiia’s daughter ; but then 
the females set up a cry of “Oh” and “Alas.” And rising 
up in the midst of the females, the wife of the wicked- 
minded one, the excellent one, named Maudodari, prevented 
him. And she spoke soft words unto him influenced by 
lust. — “O thou that resemblest Indra the Great in prowess. 
Do thou to-day sport with me. J£naki is not superior to me. 
And, O lord, do thou sport with the daughters of celestials 
and Gandharbas, and with the daughters themselves of 
Yakshas. What wilt thou do with Sitfi ?” Then that 
exceedingly powerful ranger of the night was speedily raised 
up and taken (back) to his residence. On the Ten-necked 
one having departed, the Rakshasis of fearful faces 
fell to railing at Sita in cruel and rough words, — But 
J£naki heeded their speech as a straw ; and their fury was 
lost upon Sita. Desisting from their unavailing railing, the 
flesh-feasting Rakshasis imparted unto Ravana the mighty 
intent of Sita. Then, .they all failing in their hope and 
deprived of energy, and tired, came under the sway of sleep. 
And on their sleeping, Sita intent on the welfare of her lord, 
lamenting piteously, in forlorn guise, and striken with 
extreme sorrow, mourned profusely. Then sitting up in their 
midst, Trijata spoke, — “Do ye without delay fall to your own 
selves ; but never (eat up) the dark-eyed Sita, the chaste 
daughter unto Janaka and the daughler-in-law of Da9aratha. 
In truth 1 have seen a dismal dream capable of making one’s 
hair stand on end ; (presaging) destruction unto Rakshasas 
and victory unto the husband of this one. For protecting 
us, Rakshasis from Raghava, let us solicit Vaidehi. Even 
this is relished by me. If we relate such a dream unto the 
aggrieved one, she, being freed from her diverse woes, shall 
attain the height of joy. Propitiated by our bowing down, 
Janaka’s daughter, Maithili, shall rescue the Rakshasis from 
a mighty fear.” Thereat, that bashful maiden, rejoiced at 
the prospect of her husband’s victory, said, — ‘If all this prove 




1070 



rXmayana. 



true, then for certain, (ye shall) meet with succour at my 
hands. Witnessing such a hard condition of Sita I began 
to reflect ; nor did my my mind attain ease or freedom from 
thought. And I cast about for finding means of addressing 
Janaki. And I began by extolling the Ikshwaku race. 
Hearing the words that I uttered, embellished with 
descriptions of the virtues of Rajarshis, that exalted lady 
replied with her eyes covered with tears. “Who art thou ? 
And how hast thou, O foremost of monkeys, found thy way 
here ? And what is thy delight in Rama ?’ This it behoveth 
thee to relate unto me.” Hearing her speech, I too said,— 
‘O revered one, thy husband, Rama, hath found a help- 
mate in a one endowed with terrific strength, named Sugriva 
—redoubtable, the highly powerful lord of the monkeys. 
Do thou know me as Hanuman his servant, despatched here 
by thy spouse — Rama of unwearied actions. O famed damsel, 
that highly effulgent son of Da9aratha — the foremost of men, 
hath sent as a token this ring. I desire to know, O worshipful 
dame, what behest of thine may I obey now. Shall I carry thee 
to Rama and Lakshmana on the northern shore of the Ocean ?” 
Hearing this and revolving within herself Sita, Janaka’s 
daughter, replied — “Discomfitting Ravana.may Raghava him- 
self carry me hence/ And bowing my head unto that worship- 
ful and blameless dame, I wanted of her a token as might 
conduce to Raghava’s pleasure. Whereto replied Sita — ‘O thou 
of mighty-arms do thou take this exellent jewel for which thou 
shalt be highly regarded by Rama*. Having said this that best 
of fair ones gave me the’excellent jewel, and wrought up 
with anxiety, related unto me the story of crow (for Rama’s 
information). Thereupon bent on returning here, I, with 
a fixed mind, circumambulated and bowed unto that worship- 
ful dame. And revolving within herself she again replied — 
‘Hanuman, do thou relate this unto Raghava in such a wise 
that the heroes Rama and Lakshmana, along with Sugriva 
might instantly come here. Or else there remain two 




SUNDARA KANDAM. 



1071 



months more of my life. RSghava shall not see me and I 
shall quit my life like one having'no husband. Hearing those 
piteous accents I was worked up with ire and at once resolved 
ppon destroying the city of Lanka. Thereupon my body 
increased like unto a mountain and desirous of entering into 
conflict I began to lay waste the forest. The whole forest 
was devastated — the birds and deer strayed away in fear and 
the Rakshasees, having terrible faces, awaking, beheld all 
that. And beholding me in the forest, they all, gathering, 
instantly conveyed the message unto Ravana. O King. O 
thou of mighty prowess, this thy forest and castle has been 
broken down by the vicious-souled monkey not knowing thy 
strength. O King, he has been impelled by his vicious 
sense, to do thy mischief. Do thou order for his head so 
that he might not return. Hearing this the lord of the 
Rakshasas despatched a chosen band of demons named 
Ktnkaras .* I despatched with my mace in no time eighty 
thousand of them no sooner than they entered the forest 
with darts and maces. And the few, who were saved, 
proceeded very quickly unto Ravana and related unto him 
the destruction of the soldiers by me. Thereupon I thought 
of destroying the Chaitya\ palace and destroyed with the 
pillar all the Rakshasas stationed there. Excited with wrath 
I destroyed that palace, the best in the whole city of Lanka. 
Thereupon (Ravana) despatched Ja?nbhumdli, the son of 
Prahasta . With my fierce mace I destroyed that mighty 
Rakshasa, versed in the art of war, along with his retinue and 
surrounded by a band of terrible and grim-visaged demons. 
Hearing this, Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas sent the highly 
powerful sons of the ministers followed by a regiment of 
infantry. But I despatched them to the abode of Death by 
means of my dart. And hearing of the destruction in battle 

* Literally it means servants — here it means his own personal attendants 
who were brave and heroic. 

t A place of sacrifice or religious worship. — T. 





1072 



rAmAfana. 



of the ministers’ sons of feeble prowess RSvana sent five 
heroic commanders. But I slew all of them along with 
their hosts. Thereupon the Ten necked demon sent his 
highly powerful son Akska in the battle followed by a 
number of RUkshasas. No sooner the princely son of 
Mandodari, versed in the art of war, rose high up in the 
welkin than I got hold of his legs and whirling him for 
hundred times ground him to the dust. And hearing of the 
discomfiture of Aksha, RSvana, exercised with ire, sent his 
second son, the highly powerful Indrajit incapable of being 
repressed in battle. And discomfitting that best of 
R&kshasas with his host I attained to an excess of delight. 
That hero of great prowess and mighty-arms with a number 
of other proud heroes was despatched by RSvana in great 
confidence. And beholding my unbearable prowess and 
his own soldiers slain, speedily he went away fettering me 
with his Brahma weapon. Thereat the other Rakshasas 
bound me up with a rope and carried me to R&vana. And 
thereupon I was welcomed by the vicious-souled RSLvana 
and was asked why I did come to Lanka and slay the 
R&kshasas. Whereto I replied, — “I have done all this for 
Sita. To behold her I have come here, O hero. I am the 
monkey Hanuman, the own begotten son of Maruta. Do 
thou know me as Rama’s ambassador and the minister of 
Sugriva. And on Rama’s embassy have I come here before 
thee. Do thou hear of my mission — 1 do relate unto thee, 

0 lord of Rakshasas, the message which the monkey chief 
hath commanded me to communicate unto thee. O great hero, 
Sugriva hath asked of thy welfare and hath desired me to 
communicate unto thee these well meaning words, conducing 
to the acquirement of piety, wealth and desires. ‘While I 
lived on the mount Rishyamuka covered with huge trees 

1 made friends with RStghava dreadful in conflict. He hath 
spoken to me, O king, ‘My spouse hath been taken away by 
a Rakshasa. It behoveth thee to promise me thy help in this.’ 




SbNDA RA KlNDA M. 



i°?3 

And in the presence of fire, Rama, along with Lakshmana, 
contracted friendship with me who had been deprived of his 
kingdom by VSli. And he hath made me lord over all the 
monkeys after slaying Vali in conflict with a single shaft. 
It therefore behoveth us to assist him by all means. And 
by virtue of this contract I have despatched HanumSn unto 
thee as an envoy. Do thou therefore speedily bring back 
SitS. and return her unto Raghava before the heroic monkeys 
discomfit thee. Who knoweth not the prowess of the 
monkeys who in the days of yore used to visit the celestials 
Invited ?’ With these words the king of the monkeys hath 
despatched me unto thee. And thereupon he eyed me as if 
burning me with the looks of his angry eyes. And the 
vicious-souled demon — RSvana, of terrible deeds, ordered 
for my destruction, not knowing my prowess. Thereupon 
Bivishana, the high-souled brother of that lord of the 
R&kshasas interceded on my behalf in the following strain— 
‘O thou foremost of the Rakshasas, do thou alter thy 
resolution. The way, thou art following, is beyond the pale 
of royal policy. The destruction of an envoy is not 
sanctioned by the royal morality, O Rakshasa. They 
communicate simply the mandate of their masters. O thou 
of incomparable prowess, there is no sanction for the destruc- 
tion of a messenger albeit he perpetrateth a mighty iniquity. 
Sometimes they have however been disfigured/' Being thus 
accosted by Bivishana, Ravana ordered all the demons, say- 
ing “Burn down this monkey’s tail.’ Hearing his mandate, 
the Rakshasas, of well-protected armour and terrible prowess, 
enveloped my tail with the fibres of cotton, silk and jute. 
And then striking me with their clenched fists they put fire 
to my tail. Although bound and fettered with many ropes 
I did not feel the least anguish for I was very much anxious 
to behold the city during the day. And thereupon fettering 
me and putting fire to my tail and announcing me in the public 
streets those heroic Rakshasas got at the city gate. And 



*35 




RAMklXNA. 



1074 ' 

V 

thereupon Contracting again my huge person and relieving 
mykelf of the fetters I stood again in my pristine state. 
And taking up iron darts I slew all the Rlkshasas there. 
And leaping over with great velocity the city' gate, I/'with 
my burning tail, burnt down the wholfe city from the palace 
to its outer gate like unto the fire of dissolution devastating 
the entire Creation. And I was ribt the least flurried * at it. 
'Forsooth hath jSnaki been destroyed — for behold I nothing 
in Lank£ which hath not been burnt down— indeed the 
whole city hath been reduced to ashes. For certain have I 
burnt down Site while burning the city LankSt — and I have 
thus baffled the great work of Rlma.’ While I was reflecting 
thus, being overwhelmed with grief, I heard the auspicious 
accents of the Charanas , exciting my wonder, ‘J&naki hatk 
not been burnt down. 1 Hearing those wonderful words' I 
regained my sense, b was then convinced by ah auspicious 
sign that J&naki was : not burnt down, for I was not 
reduced to ashes albeit my tail was burning. My heart was 
excited with joy and the wind spread its delltidus fragrance. 
Aitd by virtue of those manifest omens, by my confidence in 
the prowess of RSLma; and Site, and the voice of ascetics, I 
was greately delighted at heart. And beholding Vaidehi again, 

1 left her. And thereupon ascending the mount Aristha I 
began to leap, desirous of beholding yofr. And following 
the track of the Wind, the son, the Moofi, Gtfndharbas, 
and Siddhas I have beheld you all. By virtue of Rama’s 
grace and your prowess I have satisfied the charge of 
Suorriva. I have thus related unto you, what I hatf 
performed in Lanka, and it now remains with you to fulfill 
•the rest.” 



• ‘t 




SUN DA 1\ A KIND A M. 



i°75 



SECTION LIX. 

Having related all, Hanuman, the Wind-god's son 
begar^ again, saying — “Fruitful is Raghava's endeavour and 
Sugriva’s energy — for greatly pleased have I been with 
Sit&’s conduct. O heroic monkeys, Sita hath been keeping 
the life of a highly chaste damsel. She can maintain the 
animated creation by virtue of her asceticism and burn it 
with her . ire. Ravana, the lord of the Rakshasas is also 
highly advanced in asceticism by virtue whereof he hath 
not been ruined albeit he hath touched SitSL's person. Even 
the flame of fire cannot do, although touched by the hands, 
what Janaka's daughter can bring about by her ire. I have 
related unto you what had happened. It now behoveth us 
to behold Vaidehi along with those two sons of a king, after 
commanding all the monkeys headed by Jambavan and 
others. I am alone capable of destroying the city of Lank§ 
along with the RSLkshasas and their lord — Ravana. What 
more can I achieve if I am accompanied by the heroic 
monkeys like ye, powerful, having control over their own 
minds*, well-armed, able and desirous of winning victory ! 
I shall slay R&vana in conflict along with his sons, brothers 
army and retinue. I shall destroy all the R&kshasas and 
baffle all the weapons of Indrajit conferred on him by 
Brahm£, Rudra, Wind and Varuna albeit they are invisible 
in battle. Without your permission my prowess hath been 
brought to a stand still. Hills and mountains, uprooted and 
discharged by me continually, can destroy even the celestials, 
what of those night-rangers ? Even if the ocean overfloweth 
its banks, the Mount M&ndara moveth off its place, the 
enemy's host cannot frighten Jambavan in conflict. And 
specially the heroic monkey, Vaii's son, is alone capable of 
destroying the whole host of the Rakshasas. Even the 




1076 



rAmAvana. 



mount Mandara is weakened by the velocity of the thighs 
of the high-souled monkey Neela — what of the Rakshasas 
in conflict ? What hero is there amongst the celestials, 
Asuras, Yakshas, Gandharbas, serpents and birds who can 
equal Manida or Divida in battle ? I do not find any 
one who can oppose in the battle field the two best 
monkeys, the sons of Asvi gifted with great velocity. By 
me alone hath the city Lank& been devastated burnt 
down and reduced to ashes. And I had announced in 
the public streets there — ‘‘May victory crown the highly 
powerful Ram and Lakshmana, and may the king Sugriva 
advance in prosperity being protected by RStghava. I am the 
servant of the king of Ko^ola, the own begotten son of the 
Wind-God and my name is Hanuman. 1 have announced thus 
everywhere. (And I beheld there) in the Asoka forest of the 
vicious-souled Ravana, at the foot of a Singshapa tree, the 
chaste Sita waiting very poorly. She was encircled by the 
RSkshasees, worn out with grief and anxiety and was like 
unto the rays of the Moon shorn of their brilliance being 
enveloped with clouds. And Vaidehi, having a beautiful 
waist and devoted unto her husband, did not care for Ravana 
proud of his prowess and was accordingly confined by him. 
And that graceful daughter of the king of Videha was by 
all means devoted unto her lord and had all her thoughts 
centered in him like unto Poulomi* devoted unto her lord 
Purandara. And 1 saw her in that garden, wearing a single 
piece of cloth soiled with dirt, surrounded by the Rakshasees 
and remonstrated with now and then by those ugly 
demons. Having a single braid of hair, poorly, engaged in 
thoughts touching her lord, she was lying on the earth 
shorn of all grace like unto a lotus on the appearance of 
the winter. She had not the least attachment for Ravana 
and was resolved upon putting an end to her existence. 

* The wife of Indra the lord of the celestials who was confined by the king 
Nahusa. — T. 





SUN DA R 4 KA NDA M. 



1077 



And somehow creating her confidence I addressed that 
damsel having the eyes of a fawn and related unto her the 
whole story. And hearing of the friendship between Rama 
and Sugriva she attained to an excess of delight. She is well- 
behaved and devoted unto her lord par excellence and blessed 
is the high-souled and ten-necked demon that she hath not 
destroyed him (yet). And Rama shall become an instrument 
only in bringing about his destruction. She hath really been 
greatly reduced and worn out by the separation of her lord. 
Her person hath been shattered like unto learning waning 
by its prosecution on the first day of a lunar fortnight. 
Thus liveth there the great Sit& worn out with grief. Do 
ye now perform what you think proper.” 

t 



SECTION LX. 



Hearing his words, VAli’s son Angada spoke, saying,— 
“These two monkeys, the sons of Asvi, are very powerful 
and gifted with great velocity and are specially proud in 
consequence of the boon conferred on them by the Great 
Grand-father. Formerly to honor Asvi the Frand-father, of 
all the worlds, made these two monkeys incapable of being 
slain by any. And crushing the mighty host of the celestials, 
these two heroes gifted with great prowess, and maddened 
with haughtiness in consequence of the boon, drank up 
nectar. And these two, if worked up with ire, are capable 
of destroying the whole city of Lanka with her horses, 
chariots and elephants. What of other monkeys, I, myself, 
am capable of destroying soon the city along with the 
R£kshasas and the mighty R&vana ! And there is not the 
least wonder about it if I am aided by powerful monkey 




rAmAyaNa. 



tofS 

heroes like you, having control over themselves, well armed, 
capable and desirous of winning victory. I have heard, 
that, by Wind-god's son alone Lanka was burnt. Ye are all 
famed for your manliness, it doth not behove you to speak 
before R£ma. ‘We have seen the worshipful dame but 
have not been able to bring her.' Ye foremosLof monkeys, 
there is none amongst the celestials or A suras who can equal 
you either in leaping or in prowess. And therefore winning 
Lank£, slaying RSLvana along with his Rakshasa host in 
conflict and taking Site, let us go, delighted and having .our 
ends accomplished. What else is there for us to perform 
than bringing the daughter of the king Jai^ak^. when the 
Rakshasa crew shall be slain by Hanum&n ? And we shall 
place Janaka’s daughter between Rima and Lakshmana. 
What is the use of putting the other residents of Kishkinda 
into trouble ? It therefore behoveth us alone to go to Lanka 
and after slaying the best of the R^kshasas, to see Sugriva, 
R&ma and Lakshmana.” Thereupon Jambavana, the 
foremost of the monkeys, greatly delighted spoke unto 
Angada, who was thus resolved, the following pregnant words, 
— “O great monkey,. O thou of best understanding, what 
thou hast spoken, is, (I think) not proper, for we have been 
despatched by them to ransack the southern quarter, but 
we have not been commanded by the king of the monkeys 
and the highly intelligent Rama to bring her. And it shall 
u not please him even if we rescue her. And mentioning his 
own lineage, that best of the kings, RSghava, promised 
before all the leading monkeys, that he would himself 
rescue Sit 3.. How would he now falsify his own saying ? 
What is the use of undertaking this work for nothing which 
shall not conduce to his pleasure ? And useless shall be 
the display of your prowess, O ye, foremost of the monkeys. 
Let us therefore proceed where R&ma,,with Lakshmana, and 
the highly effulgent Sugriva is, and relate unto them our 
proposed work. What thou hast judged, O prince, is liked 




SVNDARa KltfDAM. i©» 

by us. And still you should look to R&ma’s resolution: and 

bring about his end. ■* 



section L x i . 



jAlll the heroic monkeys, headed by Angada and the 
great monkey Hanum&n, approved highly of the words of 
Jambavan. And these leading monkeys headed by the Wind- 
god’s son proceeded leaping from the summit of the Mount 
Mahendra. And these highly powerful ones, having huge 
persons, resembling the Mount Mandara, covered the welkin 
as if like so many mad elephants. They carried, as it were 
with their own looks, the highly powerful HanumSn, gifted 
with great velocity, having control over his own self, and 
adored by the Stddhas. They were resolved upon satisfy- 
ing RSma’s end and acquiring glory for themselves. Their 
desires were satisfied and mind elevated in consequence of 
their beholding SitSL and burning down Lank£. All of theirf 
were 'anxious to communicate this pleasant news, to ente? 
hito conflict and were resolved upon bringing about Rama’S 
wellbeing. And leaping and ascending the sky they got atf 
ife MddkUvana * preserved by Sugriva, resembling the 
celestial garden, covered with many trees, picturesque and 
incapable of being divastated by any. And the monkey- 
chief Sugriva’s maternal uncle, the heroic and high-souled 
Dadhimukha always guardeth that picturesque and spacious 
garden of the lord of monkeys. They ’were greatly worked 
lip with anxiety. And beholding thdt latge ordiard, those 
yeHow-colouted monkeys were greatly delighted and beg- 
ged honey of the prince; And the prince : respectfully 

* An orchard teeming with various trees bearing delicious 'am! sweet fruits. — T 




io8o 



RlAlAYANA. 



allowed these elderly monkeys headed by Jambavan to 
drink honey. And being thus commanded by the intelligent 
prince — V&li’s son, those monkeys ascended the trees 
infested with bees and feasting on fragrant fruits and roots, 
were greatly delighted and intoxicated. And thereupon those 
monkeys, beside themselves with joy for being allowed to 
drink honey began to dance hither and thither. Some sang, 
some laughed, some danced, some bowed down, some read, 
some walked hither and thither, some leaped and some 
talked at random. Some sprang upon one another, some 
quarrelled with one another, some leaped from one tree 
to another, and some jumped down on the earth from 
the tops of the trees. Some rose up with great velocity from 
the earth to the tops of the huge trees— some sang, others 
approached them laughing — some wept and others approach- 
ed them weeping. Some were stricking with their nails 
and others struck them in return. And thus the entire monkey 
host were bewildered with intoxication. There was none 
amongst them who was not drunk and none who was not 
excited with pride. Thereupon beholding all the fruits 
eaten up and the trees divested of leaves and flowers, the 
monkey Dadhimukha was worked up with ire and attempted 
to prevent them. And that heroic, elderly monkey, the 
guard of the garden, was in return remonstrated with by 
them who were greatly intoxicated. Thereat the highly 
spirited monkey again made up his mind to protect the 
garden from their devastations. He used harsh words, 
undauntedly towards some, struck the weak with his palm, 
quarrelled with some, and consoled others with soothing 
words. They were greatly excited with drink, and being 
prevented forcibly by Dadhimukha, they giving up all fear, 
began to pull him. And striking him with their nails, biting 
him with teeth, crushing him with their palms and feet, they, 
being drunk, almost reduced him to death and devastated 
the mangoe forest. 




SUN DA RA KANtiA M. 



io8t 



SECTION LXII. 



Thereupon Hanum&n, the foremost of the monkeys* 
spoke unto them, saying — “O monkeys, do ye undisturbed 
drink honey. I shall myself thwart them who will obstruct 
you.” Hearing his words, Angada, the best of the monkeys, 
delighted, said — ‘Drink honey, O monkeys, we must follow 
Hanumin’s advice, who hath already been crowned with 
success. We must follow him even if he leadeth us to an 
unworthy action, what of this which is most becoming ?” 
Hearing these words from Angada, the leading monkeys 
attained to an excess of delight and eulogized him again and 
again. And adoring Angada — their prince, those monkeys 
proceeded by the way leading to the Madhuvana like unto 
trees carried by a stream. And entering that orchard they 
forcibly attacked the waiters there. HanumSn saw Maithilee, 
and others heard of her from him — and those monkeys, 
renouncing all fear in consequence and obtaining permission, 
drank honey and feasted on various sweet fruits. And they, 
given to the drinking of honey, attacking the guards who 
were approaching by hundreds, gave them a sound beating. 
Some monkeys, collecting honey with their hands measuring a 
Drona,* drank it $ others collecting themselves delightedly 
into a band spoiled it ; while other yellow-coloured monkeys 
drank and sprinkled it. And some, being beside themselves 
with intoxication, struck others with the remaining quantity, 
while others waited at the foot of the trees, holding their 
boughs. And some, being exhausted with drinking, spread 
leaves and laid themselves thereon — and some being drunk 
and delighted struck others down in mad fury. And some 
lost their steps. Some roared and some delightedly set up 

* In common use a measure of thirty-two seers or rather more than sixty* 
four lbs. quadrupeds. — T. 

136 





rXmXyana. 



1082 

the music of the birds. Some of the monkeys, inebriete with 
honey, slept on the earth ; some laughed at others 
impudently and some cried aloud. Some spoke contrary 
to what they had done — and others put a different 
construction thereon. And all the waiters of the garden 
and the servants of Dadhimukha, were repressed by those 
terrible monkeys with censure and thrown up in the sky by 
their knee-joints. And terrified, they fled to different 
directions. And being worked up with anxiety, they 
approached Dadhimukha and said — ‘Commanded by Hanuman 
the monkeys have forcibly devastated the Madhuvana and 
we were thrown high up by them in the sky.” Hearing of 
the destruction of the orchard, Dadhimukha, being greatly 
enraged, consoled all the monkeys. “Proceed ye before, 
I shall soon follow you and repress by force all those 
monkeys, greatly excited with pride and the drinking of the 
excellent honey.” Hearing these words from Dadhimukha 
those leading and heroic monkeys proceeded with him towards 
Madhuvana . And Dadhimukha proceeded with great velocity 
in their midst taking up a huge tree in his hand. And all 
his attendants, taking trees, mountain crags, proceeded, 
wroth, where those leading monkeys were. And biting their 
lips in wrath and remonstrating with them again and again, 
those monkeys began to suppress them by force. And 
beholding Dadhimukha greatly enraged, all the monkeys, 
headed by Hanuman, approached him with great vehemence. 
Ami as the mighty Dadhimukha of huge arms, was proceeding 
towards them vehemently with a huge tree, Angada, wroth, 
caught him by the hand. He was beside himself with 
intoxication and therefore did not show him the least mercy, 
albeit he (Dadhimukha) was worshipful unto him. And 
accordingly with great vehemence he ground him to the dust. 
His arms and thighs were broken and his countenance was 
disfigured and that great heroe, the foremost of the monkeys, 
bathed in a pool of blood, remained senseless for sometime. 




SIjNDARAKXNDAM. 1083 

And thereupon releasing himself from them by some device 
that leading monkey, proceeded to a nook, and addressed his 
attendants, saying — '‘Let us all proceed there where our 
lord, the spacious-necked Sugriva liveth with R§ma. I shall 
relate unto him all the unfair dealings of Angada 
and forsooth shall that wrathful king punish all these 
monkeys. The picturesque Madhuvana is the most favourite 
orchard of the high-souled Sugriva. It was enjoyed by his 
forefathers and is not even approached by the celestials. 
And meting out punishment unto these monkeys, eager to 
drink honey and almost half dead, Sugriva shall slay them 
as well as their friends and relatives. Those vicious-souled 
ones are worthy of being slain since they have transgressed 
the royal mandate. And then shall my wrath, arising 
out of impatience, bear fruits.” Having thus spoken unto 
the guards of the forest the highly powerful Dadhimukha 
leaped high up in the welkin and went away with them. 
And in no time he reached where the highly intelligent 
monkey Sugriva, the offspring of the sun, was. And 
beholding Rama, Lakshmana, and Sugriva and the level 
ground he descended from the sky. And descending from 
the sky that great and heroic Dadhimukha, lord over all the 
monkeys engaged in protecting the forest, placing his folded 
- palms on his forehead and with a poorly countenance, laid 
low his crown at Sugriva's feet, 



SECTION l x 1 1 1 . 



A ND beholding that monkey place his crown at his feet 
the monkey-chief, with an anxious mind, accosted him, 
saying — “Rise up, rise up, why hast thou lain thyself at my 




1084 



KAMAYaNa. 



feet ? I declare tliou hast no fear, speak out the truth. 
From whose fear hast thou come here ? It hehoveth 
thee to suggest the becoming proceedure. Is it all well 
with my orchard Madhuvana ? I long to know every- 
thing, O monkey.” Being thus addressed hopefully by 
the high-souled Sugriva, Dadhimukha, gifted with an intel- 
ligence of a very high order, rose up and spoke — “Neither 
thyself, nor Vali, the lord of the monkeys, O king, allowed 
that orchard to be freely used by the monkeys — but that 
hath been now laid waste by them. I prevented them 
along with these attendants., but disregarding me, they drank 
and feasted there at their pleasure. They were prevented, 
O lord, in their act of devastation, by these guards, but those 
monkeys, without caring for me the least, feasted there. 
Some of them went beyond the pale of good conduct, others 
ate at their pleasure, and all frowned (at us). And when 
these attendents, being insulted by them, were greatly 
wroth, they were driven out of the garden, by those powerful 
and enraged monkeys. And they were greatly assailed by 
those many thousand heroic monkeys, worked up with ire 
and having reddened eyes. Some had their arms broken, 
some had their knee-joints crushed and some of them were 
thrown up in the sky. Thyself their lord living, these 
heroes are beaten, and the entire Madhuvana is being freely 
enjoyed by them.” The highly intelligent Lakshmana, 
the slayer of foes, addressed Sugriva, the foremost 
of the monkeys, while he was thus being informed, 
saying, — “O king, why hath this monkey, the guard over 
the forest, come to thee, and what sorrow hath led him to 
give vent to these expressions Being thus addressed by the 
high-souled Lakshmana, Sugriva, skilled in the art of speech, 
replied, — “O worshipful Lakshmana, the heroic monkey 
Dadhimukha speaks that the war-like monkeys headed by 
Angada have drunk honey. They would not have engaged in 
such an unfair proceeding had they been unsuccessful in 




SUNDARA Kl NDA M 



1085 



their mission. They have surely achieved success while they 
have thus been bent upon devastating the orchard. For this 
the warders were struck on their knee-joints for obstructing 
their revelry and for this they went so far as to disregard 
the powerful monkey Dadhimukha. I myself appointed 
this monkey the lord of ^ny orchard. Forsooth hath 

Hanuman espied the worshipful Sits. and none else. There 
is none else but Hanuman who is the instrumental of 
this work, for that best of monkeys hath in him 

a high intellect, knoweth the art of success, is gifted 
with courage, strength and prowess and is conversant 

with Sastras. That work is sure to succeed whose leading 

spirits are the mighty Jambavana and Angada, and worker is 
Hanuman. Forsooth that orchard hath been laid waste by these 
heroes headed by Angada. And ransacking the southern 
quarter, those leading monkeys have come back and delight- 
edly entered the Madhuvana. And the whole orchard has 
been explored and enjoyed by those monkeys and the 
attendants beaten and wounded on their knee-joints. To com- 
municate unto me this intelligence, this monkey of known 
prowess, * and sweet accents, named Dhadimukha, hath come 
here. O thou of mighty arms, O son of SumitrS, forsooth 
they have beheld Sita, since the monkeys, just on their return, 
have engaged in drinking honey. O best of men, they are all 
well-known monkeys and without espying Vaidehi they would 
not have engaged in the destruction of that orchard con- 
ferred on us as a gift by the celestials.” Hearing these words 
from Sugriva, pleasant unto ears, the virtuous-souled Laksh- 
mana along with R&ghava, was greatly pleased. And hearing 
this from Dadhimukha, Sugriva, greatly gratified, addressed 
that lord of the forest, again, saying, — “Greatly pleased I am, 
since, they, being successful, have explored this forest. And 
the insulting procedure of the successful is also pardonable. 
Do thou soon go there and protect that orchard, and send 
here all those monkeys headed by Hanum&n. Along with 




io86 



RXlUXVANJt. 



these two descendants of Raghu, I long to know soon 
from these monkeys headed by Hanuman, and proud like 
lions, what they have settled for the regaining of SitSL And 
beholding these two princes greatly delighted and their eyes 
expanded with joy, the king of the monkeys, thought that 
the accomplishment of the great wort was near at hand, and 
was accordingly greatly delighted. 11 



SECTION LX I V. 



Being thus addressed by Sugriva, the monkey Dadhi- 
mukha, delighted, bowed unto him, RaghavS and Lakshmana. 
And adoring Sugriva and the highly powerful descendants of 
Raghu, he along with other heroic monkeys, leaped up in the 
sky. He went away with the same speed with which he 
came and leaping down on the earth from the sky, entered 
the orchard. And entering that forest he beheld all the leaders 
of the monkeys spending the hours delightedly, having passed 
urine, the outcome of honey. And approaching them, the 
heroe, with folded hands and delighted, addressed Angada, 
with the following words — “O gentle one, do thou not take 
offence, for these monkeys, protecting the garden enraged, 
unweetingly prevented thee. O thou of great strength, thou 
art worn out with thy long journey, do thou drink thy own 
honey, thou art our prince and the master of this garden. 
It behoveth thee to forgive us for our wrath arising out of 
ignorance. Like unto thy sire before, thyself and Sugriva 
are the lords of these monkey hosts, O thou foremost of 
them, and none else. O innocent prince, I have related all 
about this unto thy uncle. When I described unto him, the 
arrival of all these forest rangers, as well as of thine 




SVNDARAK&.NDAM. io$? 

accompanied by them, and the destruction of this garden by 
you all, he was not the least offended, rather delighted. 
And worked up with joy thy uncle Sugriva, the lord of earth 
and monkeys, said ‘‘Send them all here speedily.” Hearing 
those words from Dadhimukha, Angada, the foremost of the 
monkeys and skilled in speech, addressed them all, saying — “O 
ye leaders of the monkey hosts, I fear, RUma hath heard all 
about this. Dadhimukha relates everything joyfully and hence 
I infer this. And our work finished, O slayer of foes, it doth 
not behove us to- remain here (any longer). You have all 
drunk honey at your pleasure and there is nothing left and 
you should now go where the monkey king Sugriva is. O 
leading monkeys, I shall follow what you will in a band 
desire me to do. In actions I am surbordinate unto you all. 
I am not justified to command although I am a prince. You 
are all of accomplished actions, it is not proper to repress 
you forcibly.” Hearing those ^sweet words of the prince 
Angada, the monkeys delightedly replied, saying — “O king, 
O foremost of monkeys, who else can speak thus being a 
master ? Any one else, we think, is proud of his wealth. 
Such like words become thee only and none else. Thy 
humility speaks of thy future greatness. We are all anxious 
to go there, where Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, is. 
Verily we speak unto thee, O foremost of monkeys, that 
without thy permission, none amongst us, is capable of 
advancing a single step.” They addressing him thus, Angada 
replied — “All right, let us all go.” Saying this he leaped 
up in the sky and was followed by all those monkeys, 
clouding the welkin as if with stones thrown up by a tool. 
And placing before them Angada and HanumSn, the 
monkeys leaping vehemently up in the sky roared like unto 
clouds driven by the wind. And Angada nearing, Sugriva, 
the lord of the -monkeys, spoke unto the lotus-eyed RSma, 
stricken with grief, saying — “May good betide thee. Do 
thou console thyself. The worshipful dame has been found 




io88 



RAmIFA/VA. 



out ; there is not the least doubt about it. Or else they 
would not have come as the time is already past. I (further 
more) infer this from Angada’s joy, O thou of auspicious 
presence. Without being successful in his mission, the 
large-armed prince, Angada, the foremost of the monkeys, - 
would not have come to me. If the monkeys had engaged 
in such an unfair proceeding without being successful 
in their mission, Angada would have looked poorly and his 
mind would have been over-whelmed with grief and 
forgetfulness. And without beholding the daughter of the 
king Janaka they would not have dared to destroy 
Madhuvana obtained and preserved by my forefathers. Do thou 
console thyself, O R&ma, by whom Kau^alyS. hath become 
the mother of a good son. O thou, rigidly observing any 
religious vow or obligation, forsooth hath Hanum&n beheld 
the worshipful dame and none else. No other wight is so 
qualified an instrument in encompassing this end. O thou 
of excellent intellect, Hanumln knoweth the art of success, 
is gifted with intellect, perseverance and courage and is 
versed in Sastras . That work cannot fail, which is worked 
out by Jambavan and Angada and presided over by 
Hanuman. Be not laden with anxiety, O thou of unmitigated 
prowess. These monkeys have come here excited with 
pride and drink. They would not have come with such a 
grandeur had they been but unsuccessful. From their j 
breaking down the orchard and drinking honey I inferred 
so. Thereupon he heard in the sky the joyous sounds of the 
monkeys proud on account of Hanum&n’s work, proceeding 
towards KishkindhSL and as if announcing their success. 
Thereupon hearing the noise of these monkeys, Sugriva, 
their chief, being greatly delighted, uplifted his tail. And ' v 
placing Angada and Hanumln before them those monkeys 
proceeded to behold Rama. And those heroes headed by 
Angada, delighted and intoxicated, descended before Raghava 
and the lord of the monkeys. And the mighty-armed , 




S&NDARA KANDiM. 



to8<) 

fianumSn, lowering his head, related unto R&ghava, Sita’s 
spiritual and physical well-being. And hearing from 
Hanuman the sweet words that he had beheld Sita, Rama 
and Lakshmana were greatly delighted. And being 
confirmed thus by the Wind-god’s son, Lakshmana, greatly 
pleased, respectfully looked towards Sugriva. And R&ghava 
loo, the slayer of foes, worked up with joy, cast respectful 
looks towards Hanuman. 



SECTION L X V . 



Thereupon getting at the Mount Prasravana surrounded 
by a variegated forest, lowering their heads unto the mighty 
Rama and Lakshmana, placing before them their prince 
(Angada) and bowing unto Sugriva, the monkeys began to 
relate the story of Sita. And they described unto Rama, 
the confinement of Sita in Ra Yana’s seraglio, the remonstrances 
of the she-demons, her unflinching attachment in her lord 
and the time appointed (by the R&kshasa for her destruction). 
And hearing of VaidehPs well-being Rama said — “ O monkeys 
where liveth the worshipful Sita ? And how is her attachment 
unto me ? Do ye relate everything unto me.” Hearing those 
painful words of Rama, the monkeys desired Hanuman, 
conversant with the whereabouts of Sita, to describe every 
thing unto him. Hearing their words, Hanuman, the Wind- 
god’s son, versed in the art of speech, lowering his head irt 
Sita's name and towards the southern direction (where she 
liveth) began to relate how he succeeded in beholding Sita. 
And conferring on (Rama) the heavenly jewel set on a golden 
leaf and burning with its own effulgence, Hanuman, with 
folded hands, began— “Anxious to behold Sita, the daughter 



137 




raAjA ?Ana, 



1090 

of the king Janaka, I, ploughing over the main extending ovef 
a hundred yoyana , wended my way and by and by reached 
LankS, the capital of the vicious-souled R&vana. Lanki. is 
situated on the southern bank of the southern occean. And 
I saw there SitS, in the inner appartment of RSvana. 
Centering all her thoughts in thee, breathes that damsel, O 
R&ma. I saw her reviled by the 9he demons again and 
again. She is being guarded in that garden by the grim- 
visaged R&kshasees. And that worshipful dame, O hero, ever 
used to happiness, is now stricken with grief in thy absence. 
Confined in R&vana’s inner apartment, well protected 
by those she-demons, wearing a single braid of hair and 
poorly, she is engaged only in thoughts touching thee. She 
in lying on earth, shorn of all grace like unto a lotus on the 
appearance of the winter. She hath not the least attachment 
for RSivana and is resolved upon putting an end to her 
existence. O K&kutstha, O innocent prince, after enquiring 
for sometime, I found that worshipful dame devoted unto 
thee, and narrating the glories of the lkshw&ku race, O fore- 
most of men, I created her confidence by and by, and 
addressing her I related everything. And hearing of the 
friendship between thee and Sugriva she was greatly 
delighted. And she has her respect for thee unshaken and 
all her actions are for thee. O great man, O thou best of 
men, I beheld the daughter of Janaka in this plight, engaged 
in hard austerities and ever devoted unto thee. O thou of 
great intelligence, O Raghava, offering me (this jewel) as a 
token, she wanted me to relate unto thee, the occurrence at 
the mount chitrakuta regarding the crow. And Janaki 
addressing me said — ‘O Wind-god's son, do thou describe 
everything of what thou hast seen here, unto Rama. And 
relating everything before Sugriva, do thou present him with 
this jewel which has been preserved by me with great care. 
I have kept with great care this excellent jewel of great 
effulgence. Do thou remind him of the mark which he made 




r 



SUM) A R A KAN DA M. 1091 

'on my forehead with red arsenic. 0 innocent monkey, 
greatly delighted am I on beholding the brilliant jewel 
which he has sent through thee. Breathe shall I only 
for a month i beyond that I shall never live, subject as 
I am to the demons.' Thus was I accosted by Sit§, reduced 
to a skeleton,observing pious observances, shut up in Ravana's 
inner apartment and having eyes like those of a hind. I 
have described unto thee everything, O Raghava, do thou 
make arrangements for bridging over the ocean.” And 
considering those two princes greatly consoled, the Wind- 
god's son handed over that token unto Raghava and 
described everything from the beginning to the end. 



SECTION L X V I . 

— > ■ — 

Being thus accosted by HanumSn, R&ma, the son of 
Da9aratha, placing that jewel on his breast, wept with 
Lakshmana. And beholding that excellent jewel, Raghava, 
stricken with grief, with eyes full of tears, spake unto 
Sugriva, saying, — "Forsooth my heart melteth on beholding 
this jewel as milk trickleth down from the udders of a cow 
on beholding its calf. This jewel was conferred on SitSL 
by my father-in-law at the time of our wedding, and to 
enhance its beauty, she wore it on her head. And this 
jewel, obtained from the bed of the ocean, was conferred on 
him (Janaka) by the intelligent Sakra, greatly delighted 
for being adored in a sacrifice. O gentle one, this bringeth 
back to my mind, the memory of my father, and father-in-law 
the king of Videha. This excellent jewel appeared beautiful 
on the crown of my dear one, and methinks, on beholding 
it, 1 have as if got back my beloved spouse. Do thou relate 




1092 



rAm A Yana . 



unto me again and again, O gentle one, what Vaidehi hath 
said, as if sprinkling me with the water of her words like 
unto one rendered senseless. What greater grief can there 
be, O Saumitri, that I behold the jewel obtained from the 
ocean but not Vaidehi ? Truly doth Vaidehi live for a long 
time if she breathes for a month. But O hero, I cannot live for 
a moment even without that one having dark-blue eyes. Do 
thou take me there where thou hast beheld my dear spouse. I 
cannot live for a moment while I have received intelligence 
about her. How liveth that timid damsel, having a beautiful 
waist, being terrified, amidst the terrible and grim 
R&kshasees ? Truly her countenance is not appearing 
beautiful like unto the autumnal moon, enveloped with clouds, 
although cleared off the darkness. Do thou relate unto me 
in sooth, O HanumSn, what SitSL hath spoken unto thee. I 
shall live by these words, as the sick are cured by medicine. 
O Hanuman, what halh my dear wife, sweet-speeched, and 
highly beautiful, spoken unto thee, being separated from me * 
How breathes she going through a series of calamities ? M 



SECTION LXVIK 



JOEING thus addressed by the high-souled RSghava, 
HanumSn, related unto him all of what Sita had said, — “O 
foremost of men, the worshipful Janaki, related as a token, 
all the incidents at the Mount Chitrakuta from the begin- 
ning to the end. Sleeping happily with thee, Janaki one day 
awoke before, and in the meantime, a crow wounded her 
breast with its beaks. O Rama, thou wert then asleep on 
Sita’s lap and that crow again afflicted the worshipful dame. 
And it again wounded her. And being bathed in blood and 




SUNDARlKlNDAM. 



1093 



suffering terrible pangs, that worshipful dame aroused thee. 
O slayer ol foes, O thou of mighty-arms, seeing her breast 
wounded, thou, wroth like a serpent, didst speak saying — * 
'O timid damsel, who, with his nails, hath wounded thy 
breast ? Who hath played with an angry serpent having five 
faces f* And casting thy looks around thou didst behold a 
crow facing the worshipful dame with sharpened nails 
besmeared with blood. That crow, the best of the birds, was 
Sakra’s son. And it entered speedily into the earth with 
the velocity of the wind. Thereupon, thy eyes rolling with 
ire, thou, O mighty armed hero, O foremost of the intelligent, 
didst resolve to destroy that crow. And taking a kuga off 
thy seat thou didst set it on Brahma weapon. And it flamed 
like unto the fire of dessolution before that crow. And thou 
didst let off that burning kufa towards that bird. And there- 
upon that burning kuga followed the crow. And being forsaken 
even by the celestials, who were terrified, and ransacking 
the three worlds it did not get a refuge. Thereupon it again 
came to you, O subduer of foes. And seeking thy shelter 
it laid itself low on the ground. And O Ktkutstha, thou 
didst save it albeit it was worthy of being slain. And 
thinking it improper to baffle the aim of the weapon, thou 
didst, O Raghava, destroy the right eye of the crow. There- 
upon bowing unto thee and the king Da^aratha, that crow, 
bidding adieu, went to its quarter. O Raghava, thou art the 
foremost of those skilled in the use of weapons, powerful and 
gifted with an excellent character, why dost thou not 
discharge weapons towards the R&kshasas ? The celes- 
tials, the Gandharvas, the Asuras, the Marutas — none of 
them is qualified, O Rama, to equal thee in conflict.” 'If thou, 
gifted with great prowess, hast any affection for me, do thou 
speedily, with well-armed shafts, destroy R&vana in conflict. 
And obtaining the behests of his brother, why doth not 
Lakshmana, the subduer of foes and best of men, protect me, 
O Rftghava ? Those two best of men, gifted with the 




1094 



RlMlFANA. 



effulgence of Wind and Fire, and incapable of being repressed 
even by the celestials, are disregarding me. Forsooth have 
I perpetrated a mighty iniquity since those two slayers of 
foes, being capable, do not protect me.* Hearing those 
sweet and piteous accents of Vaidehi 1 again spoke unto 
that worshipful dame, saying — ‘Forsooth can 1 swear by thee, 
O worshipful dame, that R&ma is sorely stricken with grief 
in thy absence. And Lakshmana too relenteth heavily 
beholding him laden with sorrow. It doth not behove thee 
to relent any more as I have succeeded in finding thee out. 
Thou shalt at this very moment behold the end of thy grief. 
And those two princes, the foremost of men and slayers of 
foes, actuated with energy on hearing that 1 have seen thee, 
shall reduce Lank£ to ashes. And slaying in conflict the 
terrible Ravana, with his kith and kin, RJghava, in sooth, O 
excellent damsel, shall take thee back to his own city. O 
thou of a blameless person, do thou confer on me such a 
token, as might be recognized by Rama and conduce to his 
pleasure.’ Thereat, casting her looks around, she took out 
an excellent jewel from her cloth, worthy of being set on her 
braid and conferred it on me, O thou of great strength. 
And O thou, the most favourite of the Raghu race, taking for 
thee that gem with my hands and bowing unto her, 1 
addressed myself speedily for departure. And thereupon 
beholding me ready to depart and increase in bulk and 
about to leap up in the welkin, Sita, the daughter of the 
king Janaka, poorly, bathed in tears, overwhelmed with 
sorrow and having her voice choked with grief, spake) 
saying- — blessed art thou O great monkey, since thou shalt 
behold the large-armed and the lotus-eyed R&ma and the 
highly famed Lakshmana, my lord’s younger brother.’ And 
being thus accosted by Maithili, I said— ‘Do thou speedily 
place thyself on my back, O worshipful dame, O thou the 
daughter of king Janaka, and I shall soon show thee, O great 
dame, O thou having dark blue eyeS) thy lord along with 




SC/NDA RAKkNDAM . 



1095 

Sugriva and Lakshmana/ Whereto she replied— ‘This is 
not the pious course, O great monkey, O thou the foremost 
of thy race, that I shall, of my own accord, place myself on 
thy back. And although before this I was touched by the 
demon, O hero, it was because I could not help otherwise 
subject as I was to circumstances. Do thou thyself repair, 
O foremost of monkeys, where those two princes are. 1 Address- 
ing me with these words she again said — ‘O Hanum&n, do 
thou relate my well-being unto R$ma and Lakshmana of 
leonine prowess, and Sugriva accompanied by his followers. 
Do thou so describe as the large-armed RSighava may save 
me from this ocean of grief. Do thou narrate unto R£ma this 
my terrible sorrow and the affliction by the she-demons. May 
good betide thee, on thy way, O foremost of the monkeys/ 
Thus the worshipful Sit§, gave vent to these piteous accents. 
Hearing these words do thou believe that it is all well with 
her.” 



SECTION Lxvur. 



6<rr 

JL HEREUPON, O foremost of men, out of thy love and 
adoring me for thy friendship, that worshipful dame- 
addressed me again, saying — “Do thou thus speak every 
thing unto Rama, the son of Da£aratha, so that he might 
soon take me hence, slaying Rivana in battle. O heroe, 
O slayer of foes, if it pleaseth thee, thou mayst relieve thyself 
of the toil by living in a secret nook and then proceed 
to-morrow. O monkey, in thy company, I do momentarily 
forget the weight of my grief, unfortunate as I am. O thou 
gifted with great prowess, thyself departing, I shall wait for 
thy return, but doubt I very much whether I shall live till 




1096 



rAmavana. 



then. Burnt I shall be with the fear of not beholding thee 
again, wretched and striken with grief as I am. And so I 
shall be, hereafter, overwhelmed with a mightier grief. O 
hero, besides, I entertain a grave doubt about thy assistants, 
the monkeys and bears. I do not know how shall the host of 
monkeys and bears and those two princes cross over the 
mighty main ? O innocent monkey of all the creatures 
three only are qualified to cross over the ocean, thyself, Garuda 
and the Wind. O thou foremost of those skilled in speech, 
what hast thou settled about the accomplishment of this hard 
work ? True it is that thou art alone qualified to accomplish 
this work, O thou the slayer of inimical heroes — but such 
manifestation of thy prowess shall increase thy glory only. 
But if R£ma, obtaining victory, can take me hence to his 
own city, it shall redound to his glory. It doth not behove 
the heroic RSghava, to take me away by stealth, like unto 
R&vana capturing me from the forest under a disguise. 
Truly it shall be his becoming work, if K&kutstha, the 
repressor of enemy’s host, can take me away, enveloping the 
city Lank& with his army. Do thou therefore initiate that 
work as becometh that high-souled hero and may display 
his prowess.”Hearing these sound reasonable and affectionate 
words I gave her the last reply, saying — ‘O worshipful dame, 
Sugriva, the foremost of the monkeys, the lord of monkey 
and bear hosts and gifted with manliness, hath resolved upon 
rescuing thee. He hath under his command a number of 
mighty and courageous monkeys gifted with great prowess 
and quick-coursing like imagination. Their course is never 
thwarted — whether going upwards or downwards — or moving 
tortuously. They are never exhausted in their actions — 
highly courageous and of measureless prowess. And those 
great and powerful monkeys, coursing in the air, have again 
and again circumambulated the earth. Sugriva hath many 
monkeys — my equal — and greater than I, but none of inferior 
strength. While I have crossed over the main — what of 




SIND A RAKlNDAM. 



10 9 ? 

these mighty heroes ? The leading heroes are never sent on 
a mission but only those of inferior merit. No more of 
bewailing, O worshipful dame. Do thou remove thy grief. 
And with one leap these leaders of monkey-hosts shall 
reach Lank§. O great damsel, these two princes, placing 
themselves on my back shall come to thee like unto the 
rising Sun and Moon. Thou shalt soon behold before 
Lank&'s gate R&ghava the slayer of foes resembling a lion 
and Lakshmana with a bow in his hand. And thou shalt soon 
observe in a band the heroic monkeys, gifted with the strength 
of lions and tigers, and having nails and teeth for their 
weapons. And thou shalt soon hear the roaring of the leading 
monkeys on the summit of mount Malaya, resembling 
the muttering of the clouds. And thou shalt soon behold 
Raghava, the slayer of foes, installed along with thee on the 
throne of Ayodhya after returning from the forest.” And that 
daughter of the king of MithilSL although heavily laden with 
sorrow in thy absence was greatly comforted and pleased by 
my auspicious words boding the fulfilment of her desire. 



END OF SUNDARAKANDAM. 



* 3 ® 



A



This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google" books 

http://books.google.com 





rio/d. I— 









CO 






Digitized by v^ooQie 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




Digitized by v^ooQie 




Digitized by v^ooQie 



roL. vi. 



PARTS XXI-XXX. 



THE 

RAMAYANA. 




Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 



YUDDHA KAYDAM. 




EDITED AND PUBLISHED BY 



3VIANMATEA NATH DUTT, M.A. 

Rector, Keshub Academy . 




FOR THE COMPLETE SET IN ADVANCE, INCLUDING POSTAGE. 

In India Rs. 16. In Europe £ 2 . 



y Google 



THE 



RAMAYANA.// 

* %(,/, 



Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 



— • i&tk ^ 

YTJDDHA KANDAM. 



EDITED AND PVBUSED BY 

MANMATHA NATH DUTT, M. A. 

Rector , Keshub Academy. 



PRINTED BY 



Girish Chandra Chackravarti, 
Deva Press, 65/2. Beadon Street, 

CALCUTTA. 




All rights reserved. ] 



1893. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




• szr, '* ■ ) 

L 3 3 



-^jKRU COLt 



SEP 28 1895 



^BRAR '' 5 




U p v 

rc^LC J -f- ^4 Tl 



oL 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM 



SECTION I. 



TT EARING the words of HanumSn rehearsed properly, 
R&ma, exceedingly delighted, said, — '"By Hanuman hath 
been performed a very great deed, rare on earth, and one 
incapable of being even conceived by any other in the world. 
Save GarucU and the Wind-god, and save also HanumSn, 
him find I not who crosseth the wide ocean. Entering by 
main force the city of LankS, incapable of being subjugated 
by the gods and Danavas and Yakshas, the Gandharbas, 
serpents or Rakhas, and well protected by Ravana, — who, 
living, cometh out (of it) ? And who that is not the compeer 
of Hanuman in strength and prowess, even entereth 
into (LankS), hard to subdue, and carefully guarded by the 
Rakshasas? And having so put forth his strength commensu- 
rate with his prowess, Hanuman hath also performed a 
great act befitting a servant on behalf of Sugriva.* That 
servant who, being entrusted with a hard task, — after having 
accomplished it, doeth another work in pursuance of (the 
prescribed business), is the best of men. That servant is 
middling, who, deputed to any task,t doth not, albeit 
capable, perform any other work which may be dear to the 

* Having seen Sitk — which was all that he had been commissioned to do 
by Sfcgriva, Hanum&n has destroyed R&kshasas and burnt Lankd ; and this he 
did of himself like a good servant. — T. 

t i. e. performing the entrusted work. — T. 

139 



r 



Digitized by 



Google 



iio6 



RlAllFANJ. 



king. And that servant who, entrusted with any work of 
the king, doth not, although competent, heedfully accomplish 
the same, hath been called the worst. Anent the order 
(which he had received), Hanuman hath done the work 
(and more). He hath not been humbled * — and, further, he 
hath pleased Sugriva. And by seeing Vaidehi, (Hanum&n) 
hath, while reaping righteousness, saved me, the Raghu 
race, and the highly powerful Lakshmana. And this paineth 
my mind sore, that I cannot do a like benefit, returning 
this dear office of his. Embrace expresseth the all (of the 
Deity), t and, finding this occasion, I extend my embrace unto 
the high-souled Hanuman.” Having said this, Rama, with his 
down standing on end in joy, embraced the self-controlled 
Hanuman, who was present after having finished his speech. 
Then reflecting for a while, the best of the Raghus again 
spoke in the presence of Sugriva, lord of monkeys, — 
“Complete success hath been attained anent the search of 
Sita. But. when I think of the ocean, my mind is again sunk 
in dejection. How can the assembled monkeys go over to 
the southern shore of the vasty deep, difficult to cross ? 
This tidings thou hast related unto me touching Vadehi ; 
but what are the monkeys to do next about crossing the sea ?” 
Having said this unto Hanuman, that slayer of foes, the 
mighty-armed Rama, agitated by anxiety, was then plunged in 
thought. 

* By the Rdkshasas . — T. 

t The commentator explains this obscure passage after his own orthodox 
fashion. The gist is this. Delight is the essence of the Deity, and all His in- 
cernations body forth this. Embrace is typical of this emotion. — T. 



Digitized by C^ooQie 




y VDDHAKlNDA M. 



1107 



SECTION II. 



TChen the graceful Sugriva spake words'* capable of 
soothing sorrow, unto Dasaratha’s son, R&ma, who was 
wrought up with grief, — “Why, O hero, dost thou grieve, like 
one that is base ? Let not this be so. Chase away thy grief, 
even as an ingrate resigneth amity. Nor, O R&ghava, when 
the whe eabouts of Sits. hath been discovered, and when too 
the abode itself of the foe hath been known, do I perceive the 
reason of thy sorrow. Thou, O Raghava, art intelligent, 
conversant with learning, wise, and judicious. Do thou cast 
away this sorry way of thinking, even as a self-controlled 
(ascetic) casteth away any course of thought interfering with 
the attainment of his purpose. Crossing over the ocean 
swarming with gigantic alligators, we shall enter Lanki. and 
slay thy enemy. Of a person that is dispirited and poor in 
pluck and that hath his soul overwhelmed with grief, every 
interest droopeth, and he cometh by misfortunes (one after 
another). All these heroes, these leaders of monkey-hordes, 
who are ardent for thy welfare, are competent to enter into 
fire itself. From their cheerful attitude I know this, and firm 
is my faith. It behoveth thee so to arrange things that, 
slaying the foe, RSvana of impious acts, we may bring hither 
Sita by our own prowess. Do thou, O Raghava, so order 
matters that a bridge may be constructed (over the main), 
and that we may behold the palace of the RSkshasa monarch. 
We having seen the city of Lanka, established on the summit 
of Trikuta, do thou for certain conclude Ravana as slain in 
battle immediately after (we see her). Without throwing a 
bridge over the ocean — the dread abode of Varuna— even 
the Asuras and celestials with Indra (at their head) are 
unequal to subduing LankSl. When the bridge over the 
ocean hath been constructed up to near Lanka, and when my 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




no8 



rAmAfana. 



forces have crossed (over the sea),consider victory as secured. 
As these monkeys are heroic in fight, and able to wear 
forms at will, O king, do not let thy intellect get stupified 
and thus mar all interests. In this world, sorrow berefts 
people of their prowess. Do thou do even what should be done 
by a man — summon thy manliness ; for what an actor doeth 
promptly, conduceth to his success. At this time, O eminently 
wise one, do thou realise goodness through thy energy.* 
Of heroic, high-souled, men like thyself, on their sustaining 
an entire or a partial loss, grief undoeth every interest. 
Therefore, the foremost of intelligent persons, and conversant 
with every lore, thou shouldst along with councilors like me, 
strive to beat thy foe. Find I none in the three worlds, O 
Raghava,who can stay in fight before thee equipped with thy 
bow. Thy business entrusted to these monkeys shall not 
(anyway) suffer. And soon, crossing over the boundless 
main, thou shalt behold Sit§. Therefore, O king, renounce 
thy sorrow, and call up wrath. Those Kshatriyas that 
conceive no anger in respect of their enemies, have their 
activity annulled ; and all fear furious persons. Drawing 
nigh unto us, do thou, gifted with acute intelligence, cast about 
for crossing over the dreadful deep — lord of streams — along 
with us. On these forces getting beyond the ocean, do thou 
take it for certain that we have won ; and when my whole 
host hath reached the further shore, do thou indubitably 
conclude that we have obtained victory. These monkeys, 
heroic and capable of assuming in fight forms at will, shall 
slaughter those foes by showering rocks and trees. If I see 
any means of crossing the ocean, Varuna's abode, I shall, O 
destroyer of foes, deem him as slain in battle. And what is 
the use of dilating ? Every way thou shalt prove victorious. 
And I see omens, and my mind is filled with delight. ,, 



* i. e, as I understand this rather obscure passage, prove thou good through 
thy vigor— secure victory to the cause of goodness through thy might . — T 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDHAKXNDAM. 



1109 



SECTION 111. 



Hearing Sugriva’s speech, reasonable and fraught with 
high sense, KSkutstha accorded his assent to it and spoke 
unto HanumSn, saying, — “By asceticism, or constructing a 
a bridge, or drying up the ocean,— competent every way am 
I for crossing over this ocean. Of impracticable places, tell 
me how many there are in (LankS), which are incapable of 
being come at. O monkey, as thou hast seen personally, 
1 wish to get acquainted with all this. And thou hast at thy 
leisure duly noticed in Lank& the number of the army, 
the inaccessibility (or otherwise) of the gates, the defence 
of Lanka, and the dwellings of the Rakshasas. Do thou 
faithfully relate this unto me, for thou art observant. ,, 
Hearing Rama’s speech, HanumSn, offspring of the Wind- 
god, foremost of those conversant with speech, again spake 
unto R&ma, — “Hearken ! I will describe unto thee by what 
method is the city of Lanka guarded and protected by the 
Rakshasas, how loyal the Rakshasas are, the surpassing 
prosperity of Lanka, the dreadfulness of the deep, the 
divisions of the forces, and the number of the elephants, horses, 
cars, etc.” Having said this, that best of monkeys, knowing 
the nature of things, went on, — “Lanka, filled with mad 
elephants, ever rejoiceth. She is great, thronging with cars 
and inhabited by Rakshasas. Her doors are firmly established 
and furnished with massy bolts. And she hath four wide 
and giant gates. (At those gates) are powerful and large 
arms, stones, and engines, whereby a hostile host approaching, 
is opposed. At the entrances are arrayed and set in order 
by bands of heroic Rakshasas, hundreds of dreadful sharp iron 
sataghnis .* She hath a mighty impassable golden wall, 

* A kind of fire-arms, or ancient Hindu rocket ; or a stone set round with 
sharp iron spikes. — According to R&mdnuya, a sort of mace about two yards in 
length, with spikes.— T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1 1 10 



rAmAfaNa. 



having its side emblazoned in the. centre with costly stones, 
coral, lapises and pearls. RouncJ about is a moat, exceedingly 
dreadful, with cool water, eminently grand, fathomless, con- 
taining ferocious aquatic animals, and inhabited by fishes. At 
the gates are four broad bridges, furnished with machines and 
many rows of grand structures. On the approach of hostile 
forces, their attack is repulsed by these machines, and they are 
thrown into the ditch. One among these bridges is immovable, 
strong and fast established ; adorned with golden pillars and 
daises. O Rama, albeit Ravana hungereth for fight, yet 
is he calm ; and he is vigilant and ever engaged in superin- 
tending his army. And dreadful and resembling a celestial 
citadel, Lanka cannot be ascended by means of any support. 
She hath fortresses composed of streams, those of hills, and 
artificial ones of four kinds. And, O Raghava, she is 
situated on the other shore of the ocean having its limit far 
away. And way there is none even for barks, — and all sides 
are destitute of division. And that citadel is built on the 
mountain’s brow ; and, resembling the metropolis of the im- 
mortals, the exceedingly invincible Lanka is filled with 
horses and elephants. And a moat and sataghnis and various 
engines adorn the city of Lanka, belonging to the wicked 
Ravana. And an ayuta of Rakshasas, dart-handed, hard to 
subdue, — and all fighting at the front with their swords — 
protect the Eastern gate. And a niyuta of Rakshasas with a 
fourfold force, and with the flower of the soldiery — protect 
the Southern gate. And a prayuta of Rakshasas, bearing 
swords and shields, and skilled in all arms, protect the 
Western gate. And an arvuda of Rakhas project the 
Northern gate. And car-warriors and horsemen — persons 
honored and sprung from noble lines — by hundreds and 
thousands, — and irrepressible goblins and kotis of Rakshasas, 
protect the garrison. I have broken down the bridges and 
filled up the entrenchment. I have burnt the city of Lanka 
and laid the wall low. Let us by any way whatever cross 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




TVDDHAKlNDAM. 



till 



over Varuna’s abode. Do thou take it for certain that the 
city of Lanka is subdued by the monkeys. What is the use 
of thy reckoning the rest ? Angada, Dwivida, Mainda, 
Jlmbav&n, Panasa, Nala, and the general, Nila, bounding and 
reaching R&vana’s abode, and riving the same consisting of 
woods and hills, moat and gateway, walls and dwellings, 
shall, O Rcighava, bring (hither) SitS. If this be so,* do thou 
order the entire body of the army to be brought ; and do 
thou set out at the proper hour.” 



SECTION IV. 



H earing Hanuman's speech duly from the begin- 
ning, the exceedingly energetic RSma having truth for his x 
prowess, said, — “What thou sayest — ‘I shall speedily destroy / 
the city of this dreadful Raksha/ — is true, I tell thee. 
Therefore, at this very moment arrange for Sugriva’s march. 

The Sun hath attained his meridian at this proper moment, x 
capable of conferring victory.f Let Ravana carry away Sit! 7 
(to his own country), — whither shall Ravana, living, repair ? 
Like a dying person who hath taken a death-dispelling 
drug and drunk ambrosia, SitS, hearing of my preparations 
for war, shall inspire hope of life. To-day the Northern x 
Phalguni (is in the ascendant) ; and to-morrow the moon 
shall be in conjunction with HastSL}: O Sugriva, shall we set / 

* Ebarn djndpaya : Rdm&nuja reads sense into this passage. If thou wishest 
the principal monkeys to go, bring them ; if thou wish the whole host to march , 
call it hither, and march at the auspicious moment. — T. 

\ f The moment is named abhijit. — 7 

7 t Hast& sprung from Punarvasu is the star of doom, portending death to 
Havana. The Northern Ph&lguni is Site’s natal star. The expedition begun 
v during the influence of this star, augurs deliverance to Vaidehi. — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 




1 1 12 



RAAIAYaNa . 



out, surrounded by the entire host ? The omens I witness, 
augur, that, having slain R&vana, I shall bring back Jinaki. 
The upper lid of my eye throbbeth ; and it betokeneth that 
my desire hath indeed been had.” Then, honored by the 
monkey-king as well as Lakshmana, the righteous Rama, 
understanding the import of things, again said,— “Surround- 
ed by hundreds and thousands of fast-speeding monkeys, 
let Nila go ahead of this force, for surveying the route. O 
Nila, do thou, O general, expeditiously. take the army by 
a path furnished with fruits and roots, having cool waters 
of the woods, and replenished with honey. The wicked 
Rakshasas vitiate* fruits, roots and water along the way. 
Thou, ever on the alert, shouldst preserve these from the 
Rakshas. And, bounding down into hollow places, mountain- 
fastnesses, and woods, let the rangers of the wilds, spy the 
posted detachments of the enemy. Let those that are in- 
competent, stay here. This business is dreadful, and we 
should apply our best strength in conducting the same. 
Therefore let the foremost monkeys gifted with prodigious 
prowess lead forth the choice portion of the army, numbering 
hundreds and thousands. And let Gaja resembling a hill, 
and the exceedingly powerful Gavaya, and that monkey, 
Gavaksha, master of the leaping ones,t like a haughty bull 
among kine, go in the van of the monkey-host. And let 
that foremost of monkeys, Rishava, go, protecting the right 
wing (of the army) ; and let Gandha, irrisistible like 
an elephant with the fragrant temporal juice trickling down, 
and the vehement GandhamSldana, go,t protecting the left 
wing (of the monkey-army). And, cheering the army, I 
myself, mounted on Hanuman, like the Lord (mounted) on 
Airavata, shall march in the midst of the forces. And like 

* By means of poison, etc.—T. 

f i.e. monkeys.— T. 

t The verb is singular, instead of dual, as also the qualifying epithet, 
Pdrgamadishthita. But the sense is clear.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




l'UDDHARlNDAM. 



1 1 i 3 



the lord of wealth and master of riches, mounted on 
S&rvabhauma, let Lakshmana resembling the Destroyer, 
march forth, mounted on Angada. And let that king of bears, 
the long-armed J&mbavSn, Sushena, and the monkey, 
Vegadar^, protect the rear (of the forces).” Hearing 
R§ghava’s words, that foremost of monkeys and lord of the 
army, the exceedingly energetic Sugriva, issued his orders. 
And anon those highly powerful monkeys issuing up 
from caves and mountain-summits, began to bound (on all 
sides). Thereafter, honored by the king of monkeys and also 
Lakshmana, the righteous RSma, accompanied by his forces, 
set out in a southerly direction. And he marched, surrounded 
by hundreds and thousands, Kotis and Ayutas of monkeys 
resembling elephants. And he marching was followed 
by the mighty host of monkeys ; and all those maintained by 
Sugriva were filled with joy and betrayed demonstrations of 
delight. And bounding by way of guarding the flanks of 
the forces, and leaping in front of the army for pioneering, 
blustering, emitting leonine roars, and uttering cries, the 
monkeys made towards the south. And some partook of 
perfumed honey and fruits, and some bore mighty trees, 
holding the sprouts. And some in pride (of strength) 
suddenly raised others and threw them down. And some 
fell and were anon up, and some brought others down. 
‘We shall slay Ravana, as also all the rangers ot the night* ; 
thus did the monkeys roar out in the presence of Raghava. 
Before (the army), Rhrishabha, the heroic Nila, and Kumuda, 
along with many monkeys, went on clearing the route. In 
the middle were king Sugriva, Rama and Lakshamana, 
environed by innumerable powerful and terrible monkeys. 
And the heroic monkey, Satavali, surrounded by ten Kotis 
(of troops), alone on all sides protected that monkey host. 
And accompanied by an hundred Kotis, Kesari, Panasa, 
Gaja* and Arka, by means of many protected that host on 

* Some other than the first-mentioned Gaja. — T. 

140 



Digitized by 



Google 





1114 



rAaiiyana. 



every side. And taking Sugriva before them, Sushena, and 
Jambav&n, surrounded by innumerable bears, protected the 
rear (of the army.) And that foremost of rangers possessed 
of excellence, and of restrained senses, the heroic Nila, 
general (of the army), kept going round the ranks. And 
Valimukha, and Prajangha, Jambha and the monkey Rabhasa, 
went everywhere, urging on the monkeys. While thus 
marching, breathing pride of strength, those tiger-like monkeys 
saw that foremost of mountains Sahya crowned with 
hundreds of trees, and watery expanses laughing with 
flowers, and beautiful tanks. And knowing the order of 
Rama of dreadful wrath, that terrible and mighty host, 
exceedingly terrific and resembling the bosom of the deep, 
cowed down through fear, leaving behind cities and villages 
and provinces, went like the deep-sounding sea. And at 
the side of Da^aratha’s son those heroic monkeys resembling 
elephants, proceeded by bounds, like noble horses, spurred 
on. And those foremost of men, mounted on the monkeys, 
looked beautiful like the Sun and the Moon half eclipsed by 
the two mighty planets, viz., Kahu and Ketu. And (thus) did 
the righteous R5ma proceed towards the South, accompanied 
by 1 lis army. Then Lakshmana, furnished with consummate 
sense and promptitude, who was mounted on Augada, 
spoke unto Rama, inviting words, fraught with import. 

‘ Speedily recovering Vaidehi, who hath been carried away, 
and slaying Ravana, thou wilt, thy end attained, return 
to AyodhyS, who shall also have her desire. O RSghava, 
I see all the great auspicious omens on earth and in the sky, 
signifying success unto thee. Mildly and grateful doth the 
blessed breeze blow behind the army, inspiring pleasure. 
And the birds and beasts are crying in sonorous voices. 
And all the points (of the compass) appear pleasant ; and 
the lord of day is cloudless. Bhrigu's son, lianas, also 
weareth for thee an auspicious aspect, and Dhruva is without 
blemish. And all the rishis ) pure and furnished with lustre, 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHARlNDAM . 



IXI 5 



go round Dhruba. And before us shineth the grandfather / 
of the high-souled IkshwSkus ; the spotless R&jarshi Tri5anku, 
with his priest. — And stainless and free from disturbances ^ 
appeareth Visakha. This is the racial star of us, the 
high-souled Ikshw§kus. And Nairita, the radical star of the 
Nairitas, is sore afflicted and, touched by the rod-bearing 
Dhumketu is in trouble. All this is for the destruction of ^ 
the RSkshasas. At the fated time, those that are in the 
clutches of Death, have their stars afflicted by the planets. 
And the water is dear and tastes sweet ; and the woods are 
stocked with fruit. And the odorous gale doth not blow 
strongly ; and the trees are furnished with all blossoms of 
of the season. And, O lord, this host of monkeys appeareth 
splendid to the height, as did the celestial host on the 
occasion of the destruction of Taraka. Seeing all this, 
thou shouldst, O noble one, feel delighted.” Having 
thus consoled his brother, Sumitra’s son, feeling enlivened, 
said this. The monkey-host went on, covering the 
earth. And the mighty dust raised by bears, monkeys, 
and tigers, having for their weapons nails and teeth, — with 
the foreparts of their feet and hands, enveloped the world, 
and the splendour of the sun was obscured. And as clouds 
envelope the sky, the mighty monkey-host went on, covering 
up the Southern quarter with its mountains, woods, and sky. 
And as they marched covering many a yoyana } the streams 
seemed as if they flowed in an opposite direction.* And 
they, while proceeding, took rest by pools of clear water, on 
mountains covered with trees, on plains and in forests 
teeming with fruits. Some moving straight, some moving 
askance, and some moving on the earth, that enormous 

* Kataka remarks : — “As when clouds drift past, the Moon it is that seems 
to scud accross the sky, as the monkey-army marched on, the rivers seemed 
to flow in an opposite direction”. R&m&nuya sajs that the waters of the 
streams dashed by the monkeys, held an opposite course. The former inter- 
pretation is hardly satisfactory, and R&m&nuya seems to be right. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1 1 1 6 



rAmA VAN a . 



monkey-host went on covering the entire earth. And they 
were all of delighted countenances and gifted with the 
velocity of the wind. And these monkeys devoted all 
their energy to the accomplishment of RSghava’s work. 
And they were displaying unto each other their joy, prowess 
and energy. And influenced with the vanity of youth they 
set up diverse cries. Some proceeded with speed, some leaped, 
some set up cries expressing joy, some were uplifting 
their tails, and some were striking the ground with their feet. 
Some, stretching forth their arms, were breaking the hills, 
and others the trees. And others were ascending the tops 
of the hills. Some began to make terrible sounds, and others 
made a tingling noise. And many others blasted the 
creepers with the velocity of their thighs. And some were 
engaged in sporting with trees and rocks. And thus was 
the earth enveloped with millions and kotis of fearful 
monkeys. And thus the enormous monkey host went on day 
and night. And all those monkeys, delighted, guided by 
Sugriva, and taking delight in battle, went on speedily. And 
they did not take rest even for a moment, desirous of rescuing 
Sit§. Thereupon, getting at the mount Sahya covered with 
various trees and forests, those monkeys ascended it. And 
Rama went on beholding the variegated forest, rivers and 
fountains of the mount Sahya and Malaya . And those 
monkeys broke down various trees — Champakas , Tilakas % 
mangos, Prasekas , Sindubarakas ) Tinigas and Karaviras > 
Asokas, Karanjas, Plakshas } Nyagrodhas } Jambukas and 
Amalakas . And seated on picturesque rocks, various forest 
trees, shaken by the wind, showered flowers on them. And 
there blew in those forests filled with the smell of honey, a 
wind of pleasant touch, cool as the Moon, accompanied by 
the hummings of the bees. And that mount was richly 
embellished with diverse metals. And dust issuing from 
these metals and thickened by the air, enveloped on all sides 
the huge monkey-host. There blossomed in that picturesque 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




Y UDDHA Kl NDA M. 



1 1 1 7 



mountain- vale Ketakas % Sindubaras, beautiful Vasantees , 
Mddhabis , Candhapurnas , Kandas, Chiravilyas, Mahikas , 
Vanjulas, Vakulas , Ranjakas , Tilakas. Nagas , Chutas, 
PatalikaS) Kobidaras , Muchlindas, Arjunas, Singsapas , 
Kutajas , Pintalas, Tint gas, Churnkas, Neepakas , Neela- 
Sokas, Saralas } Ankolas and lotuses. And all these trees 
were greatly disturbed by those monkeys, delighted with 
their view. There were in that mountain many a picturesque 
lake and pond filled with Chakravakas and Karandavas, ducks, 
Chraunchas and the mount abounded on all sides with boars, 
deer, and terrible bears, lions and tigers and various other 
fearful animals, and it was beautified with full blown lotuses, 
lilies, Utpalas and various other fragrant trees growing in the 
water. And various birds set up their musical choir on the 
summit of that mount. And bathing and drinking, these 
monkeys sported in the water. And ascending the mount 
these monkeys continually bounded. And excited with drink, 
they crumbled into pieces the ambrosia-smelling fruits, roots 
and flowers of the trees. And those monkeys yellow as 
honey, delighted, feasted on mangoes, long and measuring a 
drona. Breaking down the trees, blasting the creepers, 
bounding from one tree to another and making the mount 
Sahya echo, those leading monkeys went on delighted and 
excited with drink. Some ascending the trees, and others 
drinking, the whole earth was enveloped with those monkeys, 
and seemed as if beautified with ripe paddy crops. And reach- 
ing the mount Mahendra, the large-armed Rama, having eyes 
like lotuses, ascended the summit adorned with diverse trees. 
And getting at the top, Da£aratha’s son espied the vast deep 
filled with tortoises and fishes. Thereupon, passing by 
the mounts Sahya and Malaya and arranging their enormous 
host, they* by and by reached the roaring deep. And 
descending therefrom, Rama, the foremost of those who 
minister happiness unto all, accompanied by Lakshmana and 

* The monkey leaders. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





x 1 18 



rXmJlyana . 



Sugriva, entered the forest situate on the banks of the 
ocean. And reaching the expansive banks having rocks there- 
on and continually washed by the rising billows, Rama spoke 
saying, — “O Sugriva we have arrived at the abode of Varuna. 
Now hath arisen in my mind what I had not thought of 
before. And this ocean, thedord of the streams, whose other 
side is not seen, cannot be crossed over without some excellent 
measure. Let the monkey-host be encamped here therefore, 
and then concert a plan by means of which they might get 
at the other side. And reaching the shores of the ocean, the 
large-armed R5ma, stricken with grief for Sit5, ordered their 
encampment, saying , — “O foremost of monkeys, do thou 
encamp thy host on the brink of the ocean. Now hath 
arrived the hour for counsel, when we should devise some 
plan for crossing over the main. I fear the Rakshasas at every 
step, for they are greatly illusion creating — let the leaders 
therefore go to their own hosts and let them not proceed any- 
where else, renouncing them.” Hearing the words of R&ma, 
Sugriva along with Lakshmana, encamped the army on the 
brink of the ocean, covered with trees. And stationed near the 
main,the monkey-host in consequence of their resemblance in 
colour with the blue contents of the deep, looked like a second 
ocean. Thereupon, reaching the shore, those leading monkeys 
engaged in concerting a plan to cross over the vasty deep. 
And the tumult, of that monkey-host encamped there, was 
heard above the roaring of the deep. And that huge 
army of the monkeys commanded by Sugriva, and set up in 
three divisions, were deeply concerned with the accomplish- 
ment of Rama’s work. And reaching the shore of the vasty 
deep, that monkey host, delighted, beheld the ocean moved 
by the Wind. And they waited there beholding the deep of 
unimpeded expanse, having its distant shore inhabited by 
the demons, and thronged with various aquatic animals. 
While upheaving its foam on the approach of eve, it 
appeared laughing and setting up its surges, it appeared to 



Digitized by i^ooQie 



fuvdhakAndam. 



1119 



dance. It increased with the rising of the Moon and he 
reflected himself on its breast. That abode of Varuna was in- 
fested with gigantic sharks, whales and Timingalas *, disturbed 
with the fury of the Wind, filled with serpents having flaming 
frames, and various aquatic animals and rock&.and was fathom- 
less deep. It had picturesque fortresses on its marge and its 
other shore was hard to get at. And the Makaras\ and 
serpents living therein were moved by the Wind. The 
waters, as if delighted, were rising and falling. And having 
serpents of flaming frames underneath, it appeared as if 
sprinkled with scintillations of fire. And that terrible 
abode of the demons extended down to the regions inhabited 
by the Nagas or serpents. The deep resembled the welkin 
and the welkin the deep, and there appeared no difference 
between them. The sky crested with stars and the deep 
filled with gems resembled each other. The sky enveloped 
with clouds and the ocean overflowing with surges presented 
no contrast whatsoever. The waves of the mighty deep beat- 
ing at each other continually, set up a sound resembling that 
of a trumpet in the sky. It was filled with diverse gems 
and its water was poisoned by means of the air. It was filled 
with various aquatic animals, and upheaving its billows, it 
appeared as if excited with ire. And there beheld those 
high-souled monkeys the mighty main agitated by the Wind 
and muttering as if with the upheaval of the waves. There- 
upon, overwhelmed wth surprise, those monkeys, stationed 
there, espied the main brimming with rolling waters and 
moving as if (off its place). 

* A large fabulous fish. — T. 

t A marine monster confounded usually with the crocodile and shark. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1120 



rAmAfana. 



SECTION V. 



^There on the northern shore of the ocean the army was 
encamped and arranged in order by Nila. And the two 
leading monkeys Mainda and Divida patrolled about on all 
sides to protect the monkey host. And the army being 
encamped on the shore of the lord of streams and rivers, 
Rama, beholding Lakshmana by his side, spoke, saying — “I 
know that grief abates as time passes by, but my sorrow 
arising from the separation of my spouse, is increasing day 
by day. I am not sorry that she hath been stealthily taken 
away by the demon — but my sorrow is that her end is 
drawing nigh. O Wind, do thou go there where my dear 
spouse is, and touching her person, do thou touch me, for I 
shall then be happy stationing my looks in the Moon and 
being touched by thee. Alas ! my dear one cried ‘O 
lord, O lord 1 when she was taken away. Those words, 
revolving burn me like poison. I am now being burnt down 
day and night by the fire of desire, having separation from her 
for its fuel and her thoughts for its flame. Leaving thee, 
O Son of Sumitra, I shall jump into the deep and then 
shall not this fire burn me any more. This is my only 
consolation, for which I draw my vital breath— that myself and 
she breathe on the same earth. Like unto a dry land drawing 
water from a watered ground, I do live, hearing that Janaki still 
survives. When shall 1, discomfitting my enemies, behold 
SitS, having a beautiful waist and eyes resembling lotus- 
petals, as a victorious hero beholdeth the royal Grace. Like 
unto the sick drinking the elixir of life, when shall I, raising a 
little her lotus-like countenance having graceful teeth and 
lips, imprint kisses thereon ? And when shall she, laughing, 
embrace me with her rising breast resembling the palm 
fruit ? Alas that chaste dame haying scarlet corners of the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




y 0 DDHA KkN DA M. 



1 12 I 



eye, being encircled by the demons, is wishing for a protector 
like unto one having no husband, albeit having a husband in 
me. How fareth in the midst of the she-demons, that daughter 
of the king Janaka, my beloved spouse, and the daughter-in- 
law of king Da 9 aratha ? And having those Rakshasas, 
hard to repress, slain by me, truly shall she appear like 
unto the rays of the Moon extricated from sable autumnal 
clouds. Sita is constitutionally slender, and forsooth, she has 
been greatly reduced by sorrow, fasting and calamities 
touching time and place.When shall I, piercing with my shafts 
the breast of the lord of Rakshasas, renounce my mind’s 
grief ? And when shall my devoted Sita resembling the 
daughter of a celestial, fling herself anxiously around my 
neck and shed tears of joy ? And when shall I renounce 
this my sorrow arising out of Maithili’s separation, like 
unto one casting off his soiled clothes ?” The highly 
intelligent R&ma bewailing thus, the day passed away and 
the Sun, decreasing gradually, disappeared at last. And 
consoled by Lakshmana, Rama, stricken with thought touching 
5ita having eyes like lotus-petals, engaged in rites relating 
to the worship of Eve. 



SECTION VI. 



Beholding in Lanka that dreadful and awe-inspiring 
work performed by Hanuman like unto the high-souled 
Sakra, the lord of Rakshasas, looking down with shame, 
addressed them all, saying — “That monkey alone hath 
invaded and entered the city of Lanka hard to reach and 
hath espied Sita, the daughter of king Janaka. He hath 
shattered the palace^and the altar of sacrifice, slain the leading 

141 



Digitized by L.ooQle 




1122 



R A A! Ay ANA. 



Rlkshasas, and, in short, agitated the whole city of Lanki. 
What shall I do now ? And what should you all do on this 
occasion ? It behoveth you all to give me such counsel as 
becometh me and will conduce to my glory.” ‘Victory is the 
outcome of consultation* — this do the sages* say. Let us, 
therefore, O mighty ones, engage in counsel, relating to the 
measures we should adopt towards Rima. There are three 
orders of mert on this earth — the superior the middling and 
the inferior. This distinction cannot be perceived without a 
knowledge of the signs, and so I shall relate unto you their 
merits and demerits. He is said to belong to the superior 
order, whose counsel contains the three signs (mentioned 
below), or who engages in works after consulting duly with 
friends capable or with persons having the same end in view, 
and some times with others, and who serveth Providence. 
He belongs to the middle order who consults his own self 
only, depends on the Providence, and engages alone in works. 
And he belongs to the inferior order who engageth in works 
without ascertaining their merits or demerits, disregarding 
the will of the Providence and saying, ‘I will do this*, and is 
inactive (at last). And counsels are also divided into three 
divisions like unto the three orders of men (mentioned). 
That counsel belongs to the superior order in which the 
counsellors with their judgment reinforced by a knowledge 
of political ethics, are unanimous. That one belongs to the 
middle order in which the counsellors after varied discussion, 
arrive at unanimity in. the long run. And that one is 
the worst in which the counsellors differ from each other 
and agree a little in the long run, with no good result. 
You are all gifted with good intellects : do you all unani- 
mously settle as to what becometh me and conduceth to my 
well-being. Environed by a thousand of patient monkeys, 
Rima, with a view to capture our city, is approaching 
towards Lanki. Forsooth, shall he cross over the main along 

♦ Manaswiria, according to R&m&nuya, means, hero.*— T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 



FUDDHARlND iM. 



1123 



with his younger brother and a mighty host. He can by his 
prowess dry up the ocean and do the other * Rama ap- 
proaching thus with a hostile intention along with the 
monkeys, it behoveth you to devise such means as might 
protect my city and army. 



SECTION VII. 



Being thus accosted by their lord, the highly powerful 
R&kshasas, devoid of good sense and ignorant of sound 
counsel, replied with folded palms, saying,— “Thou hast, O 
king, enough of soldiers and weapons. Why art thou smitten 
with sorrow then ? Repairing to Bhagavati, thou didst dis- 
comfit the serpents in battle. The God of Death, living on 
mount Kaila^a, encircled by Yakshas , was subjugated by 
thee in a great battle. And that mighty lord of men, proud of 
his friendship with Siva, was defeated by thee wrathfully in 
battle. Discomfitting and slaying the band of Yakshas, thou 
didst bring this flowery car from the mount Kailua. O 
lord of Rikshasas, desiring thy friendship out of fear, Maya, 
the king of Danavas, offered thee his daughtert for thy 
spouse. O thou of mighty arms, thou didst bring under thy 
subjection the powerful and irrepressible DanavaJ for the 
pleasure of Kumbhinasi.% And entering the region under 
the earth, thou didst defeat the serpents — and thus bring 
under thy subjection V&suki, Takshaka, Sankha, and Jati. 
Those heroic Danavas, the Kalakeyas y were greatly powerful, 

* i. e. bridge over the ocean. — T. 

f This refers to Mandodari, Ravana’s favourite queen.— T. 

% This refers to Madhu. — T. 

4 Ravana’s sister, who was married to Madhu. — T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1124 



rAmAfana. 



irrepressible, and proud of the boons conferred on them. 
And fighting with them perpetually for a year, thou didst 
bring them under thy control, O lord, O slayer of foes, and 
learn from them the science of varied illusions, O king of the 
Rakshasas. O great hero, by thee were defeated in battle, 
the heroic and powerful sons of Varuna, followed by a fourfold 
division of their army. The dominion of Death is like the 
mighty main, having his rod for aquatic animals, agonies 
for the trees that cover its islands, the noose for the 
billows, his attendants for the serpents and his terrible 
fever for the dreadful attitude of the deep. And diving . 
into this terrible deep, thou didst, O king, discomfit Death 
himself and win glorious victory. And every one was 
pleased there with thy successful fight. The Earth was filled 
with various heroic Kshetriyas, resembling Sakra in prowess 
as she is adorned now with various trees. Raghava is not 
their equal either in strength or prowess. And all those heroes, 
hard to repress in battle, were slain by thee, O king. Do 
thou wait here, O great king 5 thou needst not take any 
trouble. Indrajit alone shall slay all these monkeys. And 
this one, O mighty monarch, having celebrated the 
Mahe9wara* sacrifice, hath obtained a noble boon, rarely 
(attained by persons). Having agitated the ocean of celestial 
hosts, having darts and lances for its fishes, showering arms 
for its moss, elephants for its tortoises, steeds for its frogs, 
Rudra and Aditya for its ferocious animals, the Maruts and 
Vasus for its mighty serpents, cars, horses, and elephants 
for its volume of waters, and infantry for its spacious shore, 
this one (Indrajit), taking captive the lord of the celestials 
himself, had brought him into Lanka. Then, O king, liberated 
agreeably to the injunction of the Great-father, the slayer of 
Sanwara and Vritra, worshipped of all the celestials, went 
(back) to heaven. Do thou, O great king, entrust Indrajit 
with this business, — until he bringeth to destruction, the 

* Relating to Maha^wara— the great Lord, a designation of Siva.— T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




yUDDHAKlNDAM. 



1125 



monkey-liost along with R£ma. O king, thou must not think 
that this calamity, coming from an ignoble person is not in- 
significant. Thou shalt slay R&ghava.” 



SECTION viii. 



Then that heroic general, the R£kshasa named Prahasta, 
possessing the splendour of sable clouds, submitted 
with joined hands, — “I am competent to baffle in battle 
gods and DSnavas and Gandharbas, ghosts, birds and 
serpents, — what then is a couple of human beings ? Having 
been negligent and confident (in our power), we have 
all been deceived by Hanum&n. But, I living, that ranger 
of woods shall not (again) go hence with his life. All the 
earth down to the ocean, containing hills,' forests and woods, 
shall be rendered free from monkeys. Do thou command me. 
And, O ranger of the night, I shall deliver (the RSkshasas) 
from the monkeys ; and thou shalt not have to suffer in the 
least in consequence of thy transgression.”* Then the 
Rikshasa named Durmukha, growing enraged, said,— “This 
overpowering of all pf us must not be forgiven — this flagrant 
discomfiture of the metropolis of the auspicious lord of the 
Rkkshasas as well as of his inner appartment by the foremost 
of monkeys. This moment marching alone (from hence) will 
I exterminate the monkeys, even if they shall have entered 
the dreadful deep, or the sky, or the subterranean regions.” 
Then the exceedingly powerful Vajradanshtra, weilding up a 
terrific bludgeon, stained with flesh and gore, wrathfully 
observed, — “RSma the irrepressible existing, and also Sugriva 
with Lakshmana, what have we to do with the weak and 
* i. e . the ravishment of Sitl.— T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1126 



H\MA YANA . 



wretched HanumSn ? This very day, slaying single-handed 
Rama with Sugriva and with Lakshmana, with this bludgeon, 
shall I return, after having sorely troubled the monkey-host. 
And, O monarch, if thou art minded, hear this other word 
of mine ! Verily he that is fertile in resources and ever 
ready, compasseth success. Let thousands of Rakshasas, 
heroic, terrible, fearful to behold, and wearing forms at will, 
appointed by the lord of Rakshasas, presenting themselves 
before Kakutstha in palpably human shapes, calmly say unto 
that foremost of the Raghus,— ‘Despatched have we been by 
thy younger brother.* Hearing this, he (Rama), summoning 
his forces without delay, shall come hither. Then, equipped 
with darts, javelins and maces, and bearing bows, arrows 
and scimitars in our hands, we shall swiftly and summoning 
speed* set out (from hence) ; and stationing ourselves in 
the sky in bands, and slaughtering the monkey-army with 
mighty showers of rocks and weapons, we shall lead it to 
DeatVs door. Let us in this wise decoy R9Lma and 
Lakshmana ; and if they fall into our design, they shall, 
without doubt, lose their lives." Then that hero, 
Kumbhakarna’s son, named Nifcumbha, endowed with 
exceeding prowess, in high wrath remarked unto Ravana, 
destroyer of worlds,— -“Do ye, all of you, stay here along 
with the great king. I alone shall slay R&ghava together 
with Lakshmana, and Sugriva with HanumSn, and all the 
monkeys." Then a R&kshasa, named Vajrahanu, resem- 
bling a hill, in wrath lapping the comers of his mouth with 
his tongue, said,— 1 “Do ye, casting off anxiety, engage yourself 
as ye list. I alone shall swallow up that entire monkey-host. 
Do ye, remaining at ease and without anxiety, drink Varunaf 
wine. 1 single-handed shall slay Sugriva with Lakshmana, 
as well as HanumSn with Angada,— and all the monkeys. 

* Twarita — summoning spe$d~-redundant. — T. ~ 

f Vdruna wine, otherwise oamed Vdmni is prepared from hog -weed, 
ground with the juice of the date or palm, and then diat{lled.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




y LDDH A KXN DA M. 



1127 



SECTION IX. 



Then, in tierce wrath seizing bludgeons, and patttgas , 
lances and bearded darts and javelins, and axes, bows and 
excellent shafts and swords, resembling crystelliue water, 
sprung up the Rikshasas, Rabhasa, and the mighty 
Suryya9atru y aud Saptaghna,and Yajnakopa, and Mah&p&r9wa 
and Mahodara, Agniketu the irrepressible, and the R&kshasa 
Ra^miketu, and the lusty Indrafatru, son unto R&vana— - 
and Prahasta, Virup&ksha, and the exceedingly strong 
Vajradanshtra,— and Dhumrkksha, and Nikumbha, and the 
Raksha Durmukha. And, flaming in energy, they all addressed 
Ravanu, saying, — “To-day shall we slay Rama, and Sugriva 
along with Lakshmana, and the helpless Hanum^n, who hath 
damaged Lanka. Then, preventing them, who had (thus) 
equipped themselves with all kinds of weapons, and making 
them sit down, Vibhishana, with joined hands, again spoke 
unto them, saying, — “The wise have asserted that an appeal 
to prowess should be resorted to aneut a business then only 
when the end sought cannot be attained through* the three 
(other) means.* Prowess produceth fruit only in respect of 
well-advised action directed while carefully watching(enemies) 
that are negligent, or captive, t or under Divine affliction. 
But why do ye intend to discomfit (R&maj, who is vigilant, 
who desireth victory, who is strong in the Divine strength, 
who hath subdued passion, and who is hard to subdue ? Who 
had in this world ever thought of or reasoned about Hanu- 
m&n's career over the dreadful deep, the lord of streams and 
rivers ? O rangers of the night, the strength and prowess (of 
the foe) being immeasurable, ye should by no means reck- 
lessly disregard him. And what was the wrong that formerly 

* Vis., conciliation, .gift, and creating division.— T. 

t In the hands of other enemies. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 



RAMlFlNA. 



1128 

had been done by R&ma unto the king of the Rikshasas, that 
he hath carried off from Janasth&na the spouse of that illustri- 
ous one ? If Khara, who had trespassed into regions not his 
own, hath been slain in battle by Rama, surely a creature 
should to the best of his might preserve his life. It is for this 
great fear that exerciseth us on the score of Vaidehi owing its 
existence to this,* that she, having been ravished, should 
(now) be given up. What is the use of acting so that quarrel 
may be the consequence ? And (Rama), possessed of prowess, 
yet ever abiding by morality, is incapable of initiating 
hostilities for no purpose. Therefore, do ye give him his 
Maithili. And before, he by means of his shafts riveth this 
city together with her elephants and steeds, overflowing 
with countless gems, do ye give him his Maithili. And before 
the dreadful, irrepressible and mighty monkey-host blocketh 
up this LankS, of ours, do ye give (back) SitS. This city of 
Lanka shall perish as also all the heroic Rakshasas, if thou 
dost not thyself make over R£ma’s spouse unto him. 1 exert 
myself to pleasure thee, because of the fraternity (that 
subsisteth between us). Do what I say. 1 say what is truth 
and what also is for thy good. Do thou render (back) R&ma’s 
Maithili. * Ere yet the king's son, for compassing thy 
destruction, showereth sure shafts resembling the rays of 
the autumnal Sun, having shining heads and feathered parts, 
and exceedingly hard, do thou render Maithili unto 
DS^arathi. Forsake thy wrath at once, which destroyeth 
happiness and virtue ; and follow righteousness, which 
enhanceth enjoyment and fame. Be thou propitious, — so that 
we may live (at ease) along with our sons and relatives. 
Render (back) Maithili unto Da9aratha , s son.” Having 
heard Vibhishana's speech, R&vana — lord of R&kshasas— 
leaving all of them, entered his own chamber. 

* The feeling of revenge for the slaughter of Khara and the rest. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YVDDHA a A nda m. 



1129 



SECTION X . 



Then early in the morning, like the fiery and refulgent 
sun entering a mighty mass of clouds, Vibhishana, fast to 
virtue and interest, heroic and possessed of exceeding 
splendour, playing a perilous part,* entered the apartment 
of his elder brother, resembling an assemblage of mountain- 
summits and elevated like the peak of a mountain, orderly, 
divided into spacious rooms, — the resort of the great- 
inhabited by august and intelligent persons attached (to 
Ravana) ; guarded around by lusty Rakshasas in limited 
numbers ; having the air agitated by the breath of mad 
elephants ; with loud blares of conchs, and resounding with 
trumpets ; embosoming numbers of beautiful damsels, with 
its high-ways (overflowing with talk) ; furnished with doors 
of polished gold $ embellished with excellent ornaments ; 
resembling the abode of the Gandharbas, or the mansion of 
the Maruts ; containing heaps of gems ; like unto the 
dwelling of serpents. And that one of exceeding energy 
heard sacred and holy sounds uttered by Veda-versed 
Brahmanas celebrating the victory of his brother ; and that 
highly powerful (hero) acquainted with Mantras and the 
Vedas saw Vipras worshipped with vessels of curds, clarified 
butter, flowers and fried paddy. And the mighty-armed 
(Vibhishana) saluted the younger brother of the bestower of 
riches, t seated there. And that one acquainted with 
manners, after proper courtesy, sat him down on a seat 
decked in gold, which was pointed out (by a royal glance). 
And in retirement as also in presence only of his counsellors, 



* The project he had conceived, vis., converting RAvana to his own policy 
of pacification, was fraught with peril to himself, considering his brother’s fierce 
temperament. — T. 

t Kuvera. — Ravana was Kuvera’s younger brother. — T. 

142 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




ramAtAna. 



1 130 

Vibhishana spoke unto the high souled R&vana words backed 
by reason, and greatly fraught with his welfare. And 
having, with soothing speech, pacified his elder brother and 
extended towards him the due civilities, that one, who through 
height of sentiment had noted excellence and the want of it, 
addressed (Vibhishana) in words befitting the occasion and 
the place, — “Ever since, 0 subduer of enemies, Vaidehi hath 
come hither, are seen inauspicious omens. Fire, enveloped 
in smoke at the time of its being ignited, and thereafter 
throwing out scintillations, with its brightness obscured by 
vapour, doth not increase adequately even on oblations 
being poured, into it with Mantras. Reptiles are discovered 
in kitchens, sacrificial fire-chambers, and the places of 
Vaidika recitations ; and ants (are found) in clarified butter. 
The milk of the kine hath been dried up ; and the nobler 
elephants are without the temporal juice. And horses, 
albiet they have feasted on fresh grass, neigh distressfully.* 
And asses, camels and mules, O king, with their hair 
standing erect, shed tears ; and although they are ministered 
unto medically, they do not return to nature. And crows in 
numbers emit harsh cries on all sides, and are seen in 
swarms at the tops of edifices. Vultures sit sadly and 
distressed upon the roofs of houses. During the two twilights, 
the jackals, coming in sight, utter ominous howls. And 
wolves and other (ferocious) animals, as well as deer, 
approaching the gate of the palace in swarms, are heard to 
set up loud roars resembling the thunder. Things having 
come to this pass, even this expiation, I fancy, is capable 
of removing the evil omens. Do thou render back Vaidehi 
unto Ra^jhava. If I have said this through ignorance or 
covetuousness, thou ought not, 0 mighty monarch, criminate 
me. All Rakshasas and Rakshasis, as well as those be- 
longing to palace and the inner apartment— shall have to 

* The commentator remarks, evidently with justice— “That is, the horses, 
having eaten their fill, still hunger.” — T. 



Digitized by 



ioddhakAnoam. 






experience the evil consequence (of this act of thine). All 
the counsellors have refrained from tendering this counsel 
unto thee ; but surely I must tell thee what I have seen 
or heard ; and adopting proper measures, it behoveth 
thee to act so.”* (Ravana’s) brother, Bibhishana, thus spoke, 
unto his brother, the chief of Rakshas, in the midst of 
counsellors, these words fraught with his good. Hearing 
this beneficial, mild and pregnant speech, fortified by reasons 
and capable of compassing (his welfare) for the present, past 
and the future, (R&vana) who had conceived a passion 
(for Sit§), getting into a rage, replied, — “Fear find I none 
whatever. RSghava never shall have Mithila’s daughter. 
Even if Lakshmana’s elder brother should be supported in 
battle by the celestials with Indra (at their head), how can 
he stay before me (in the field) ?” Having said this, that 
destroyer of celestial hosts, the Ten-necked one, possessed of 
mighty strength and of terrific prowess in battle, then 
dismissed his brother Vibhishana, who had spoken truth. 



SECTION Xf . 



T HE unrighteous king, overmastered by his passion (for 
Sita), in consequence of his sinful act as well as the loss of 
honor he sustained at the hands of his friends, became 
reduced. And the occasion for war was wanting. RSvana, 
possessed by lust, and continually thinking of Vaidehi, 
conceived along with his counsellors that the time for entering 
into hostilities had arrived. And sallying forth, he ascended 
a mighty car furnished with golden network, adorned with 
pearls and coral, and yoked with trained steeds. And having 
* In accordance with my suggestion.— T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1132 



rAjijA fan a. 



ascended tliat excellent vechicle, having sounds resembling 
those of mighty clouds, that foremost of Rakshas, the Ten- 
necked one, drove towards the court. And as he coursed 
on, Rakshasas, bearing swords and shields, and carrying all 
kinds of weapons, went before the lord of the Rakshasas. 
And (some of) these, wearing various frightful suits, and 
decked with diverse ornaments, went, surrounding his rear 
and flanks. And atirathai went with cars, and superb mad 
elephants, and sportive steeds ; and bearing in their hands 
maces and bludgeons ; and darts and clubs. And as RSvana 
marched towards the court, there arose the loud blares of a 
thousand trumpet, and the uproarious sounds of conchs. 
And that redoubtable and mighty car-warrior held his course, 
suddenly making sides resound, and beautifying the high 
ways. And the spotless white umbrella of the lord of 
Rakshasas, being raised up, looked beautiful like the Moon 
at her full. On his right and left graced two crystal white 
chowris furnished with threads of gold. And all those 
Rakshasas standing on the ground with joined hands, bowed 
down their heads to the foremost of Rakshasas who was seated 
on his car. Hymned by the Rakshasas with blessings of 
victory, that exceedingly energetic chastiser of enemies 
arrived at the court constructed (by Vigwakarma). And 
that highly energetic one in person entered that court 
paved with silver and gold, having its heart decorated with 
crystal, and gracefully covered with silk, embroidered with 
gold ; excellently constructed by Vi^wakarma, and guarded 
by six hundred ghosts. And Ravana sat down on a superb 
and august seat consisting of lapises, furnished with a 
pillow; and covered with a soft dear-skin. And lord-like 
he commanded the envoys possessed of fleet vigor, saying, — 
“Do ye speedily summon hither the Rakshasas. 1 fancy 
some mighty effort hath to be put forth against our foes.” 
Hearing his words, the envoys began to range Lanka; and 
going to every house, they fearlessly collected the Rakshasas 



Digitized by 




YIDDHaKINUAM. 



”33 



from places of sport, bed -rooms, and gardens. Then some 
set out, mounting cars, and some mounting proud coursers, 
and some on foot. And like the welkin filled with fowls, 
the city thronged with approaching cars, elephants and 
steeds. And leaving their various vehicles and cars behind, 
they entered the court on foot, like lions entering mountain 
caverns. And taking the feet of the sovereign, and honored 
by him (in turn), they sat them down, some on raised seats, 
some on cushions of Ku9a, and some on the floor. And 
presenting themselves agreeably to the command of the 
monarch, they sat them down each according to his position, 
before the lord of R&kshasas, RSvana. And there came also 
the learned and competent to arrive at infallible decisions, 
and they sat them down in order of merit. And there also 
came courtiers endowed with virtues, versed in every thing, 
and having intelligence for their eye-sight, — and innumerable 
heroes by hundreds also (arrived) at that court for ascertaining 
the course that would prove beneficial. And then mounting 
a large, noble and splendid car, having its parts decked with 
gold, and yoked with horses, the magnanimous and renowned 
Vibhishana went to the court of his elder brother. And 
that younger brother (of Ravana), announcing his name, 
bowed down at the feet of his elder brother. And Suka and 
Prahasta were employed in giving to each a separate seat 
befitting his rank. And from all sides in the court there 
began to spread the odour of excellent agura and sandal and 
wreaths belonging to the Rakshasas, decked in gold and 
various gems, and clad in costly attires. And no one among 
these present at court uttered any thing, or spoke any 
falsehood, or conversed in loud accents. And having 
completely attained their desire, all of fierce prowess, gazed 
at the face of their lord. And in the assembly of those 
intelligent, and exceedingly powerful persons, equipped 
with arms, the intelligent Ravana appeared splendid like the 
Vajra-handed Indra among the Vasus. 



Digitized by f^ooQie 




RAM A FAN A. 



ii34 



SECTION X 1 1. 



Then surveying that entire assembly, that conqueror in 
battle delivered himself unto Prahasta, — general of the forces, 
saying, — “O general, it behoveth thee so to order the 
disciplined fourfold forces that they may successfully protect 
the city.” Thereat, Prahasta, carefully carrying out the royal 
behest, stationed all the forces within and without the city. 
And having posted the army for the defence of the city, 
Prahasta sitting down before the king, said,—”! have 
stationed the forces belonging to thee who art possessed of 
strength, inside as well as outside. (Now), without suffering 
thy mind to be agitated with anxiety, speedily, do what 
is in thy heart. Hearing the speech of Prahasta seeking the 
welfare of the kingdom, R&vana craving* for enjoyment, 
spoke in the midst of his aderents, — ”When;Virtue, or happi- 
ness, or interest is in straits, it behoveth you to (know your 
course) in relation to pleasant and unpleasant, happiness 
and misery, profitable and unprofitable, and good and evil. 
No business of mine which ye have set about after taking 
counsel, hath ever miscarried. And like V&sava environed 
by the moon, stars and plannets, and the Maruts, I surrounded 
by you, have attained to plenitude of prosperity. I am, for 
certain, going to employ you all. In consequence of his 
sleep, I could not inform him of this matter. After having 
slept for six months that one of prodigious strength — foremost 
of those bearing arms — hath just risen. Janaka’s daughter and 
Rama’s beloved wife hath been brought hither from the forest 
of Dandaka, the region ranged by Rakshas. That indolent 
damsel wisheth not to ascend my bed ; nor is there any in the 
three spheres, that to me is like unto Sita. She is slender- 
waisted,and high-hipped, and her face is as the autumnal Moon 
resembling a golden image. She is meek and looketh like the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



YUBDHA KkNDAM. 



**35 

hand work of Maya himself gifted with an infinite variety of 
fascinations.* And beholding her dainty and tender feet with 
roseate soles, and having coppery nails, my mind burnetii 
(with desire). And seeing her resembling the flame of a 
sacrificial fire and the splendour of the Sun himself • and 
her fair face furnished with a prominent nose and elegant 
eyes, I, having lost control over self, have come under the 
sway of desire. And my passion, uninfluenced by anger and 
joy, capable of producing pallor, and constantly causing 
anguish and sorrow, hath rendered me pale. Expecting her 
lord, Rama, the beautiful one having expansive eyes, hath 
solicited for a year's space ; and I have pledged my fair 
woods to her of graceful eyes. But tired am I on account of 
my passion, — like a horse spent on the way. How can the 
rangers of the woods, or the sons of Da^aratha cross over 
the sea ungovernable and swarming with countless creatures 
and fishes ? On the other hand, a single month hath 
troubled us grievously. Hard it is therefore to understand 
the course of events. Do ye act, each as he thinks 
proper. And although no fear can come from mortals, yet 
ye should deliberate (as to what ye should do). Formerly I 
had gained victory with the help given by you ; do ye in the 
same way stand by me now. The king's son, having learnt 
that Sita is on the other shore of the ocean, taking before 
them monkey headed by Sugriva, reached Varuna's abode. 
Do ye so counsel that Sita may be with-holden by me and 
the sons of Da9aratha may be slain j but ye must prefer 
certain counsel. No otherf person in this world hath the 
power to cross the sea along with the monkeys, — victory, 
therefore, is undubitably mine." Hearing the sorrowful 

* This reminds one irrisistibly of Cleopatra’s. The Bengali translators 
evidently failing to understand Mayava Mayanirmita,\idive conveniently — tras- 
ferred the phrase in tact to their versions. — T. 

t I fail to understand anyasya , "no other person” nor does the commen- 
tator helps me anyway.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



1136 



RlMArANA. 



speech of (RUvana) afflicted with lust, Kumbhakarna grew 
enraged, and said,— “When just on seeing (Site) of Rama 
along with Lakshmana, thou didst by main force carry her 
away, it plainly appeareth that thy mind, like the Yamuna 
filling her bed, hath been possessed (by her).* O great king 
all this (that thou hast done) is not worthy of thee. If thou 
hadst at the outset consulted us in this matter, we would 
have doue what was proper.T O ten-faced one, the king, 
that arriving at certain conclusions, carrieth on his regal 
affairs agreeably to justice, hath not to repent afterwards. 
But those actions that are done without deliberation, like 
unto clarified butter poured in an impure sacrifice, conduceth 
only to harm. He doth not know what is proper and what 
not, that performs prior actions afterwards, and posterior 
actions first. Others spy holes in the actions of the volatile, 
the latter may be possessed of great power, — like swans 
passing Krauncha through the hole.J By luck it is that 
R§ma hath not yet slain thee, who hath done this tremendous 
thing, without reflection, resembling food mixed with poison. 
But as thou hast entered upon a course of action which is 
improper even in repect of foes, I will, O sinless one, perform 
thy work by slaying thy enemies. And, O ranger of the 
night, I will exterminate thy foe. Even if Sakra and the sun, 
even if fire and the War-god, even if Kuvera and Varuna, 
should range themselves against me, I will fight them. 
Purandara himself shall be afflicted with fright when I having 
my body measuring a mountain, and furnished with sharp 
teeth, shall, setting up roars, fight with my huge bludgeon. 
Before Rama shooteth a second shaft, to slay me, I shall 
drink his life-blood. Be thou comforted by slaying Da9aratha’s 
son, I will exert to secure blessed victory for thee. Having 

* This passage is very obscure, and the commentator’s gloss does not at all 
serve. — T. 

t i. e. we would have prevented thee. — T. 

t The hole made by the dart of Kumara. — T. 



Digitized by 





YUDDHAKAnDAM. 1 1 37 

killed R£ma along with Lakshmana, I shall devour all the 
principal monkeys. Do thou make merry at thy will, drink 
the Varuni, and, with thy mind set at rest, conduct affairs 
fraught with thy welfare. On Rama being despatched to the 
mansion of Yama, Sita shall come under thy subjection for 
ever and a day.” 



Section xm. 



{Seeing R&vana wrought up with wrath, the exceedingly 
strong Mahaparcwa, reflecting for a moment, observed with 
joined hands, — “The man that, entering the forest, abound- 
ing with deer and ferocious animals, doth not drink honey, 
maketh a fool of himself. O destroyer of foes, who is the 
lord of thee, that art lord thyself ? Enjoy with Vaidehi, 
taking thy enemy by the hand. And, O thou endowed 
with prodigious power, do thou exerting thy might lead thy 
life, after the manner of hens, and invading Sita again 
and again, do thou enjoy her and derive pleasure (therefrom). 
And when thou hast attained thy purpose $ what fear can 
succeed ?. Alike when on thy guard, and off it, thou shalt 
provide against all exigencies. Kumbhakarna along with 
us, as well the exceedingly powerful Indrajit, are competent 
to chastise the thunder-bearing (Deity) equipped with his 
thunder. Passing by gift, conciliation, and dissension, which 
have been assigned by the wise as the means of success, I 
relish the success in business which is attained through 
chastisement. O highly powerful one, we shall, without 
doubt, by the prowess of our arms, subdue all these enemies 

M3 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1138 



RlMlYANA. 



•of thine that have come hither.” Thus addressed by 
Mah5p3rcwa, king RSvana, honoring his speech, said,— “O 
Mah&pUrcwa, I will relate unto thee, who hast spoken (thus), 
a secret matter relating to myself, which befell me long 
since I saw Panjikasthall, like a flame in the sky, coursing 
to the Great-father’s mansion. Her pace slackened, as soon 
as she saw me, (turn) I feasted on her and deprived her. of 
her attire. Then she went to the Great-father’s place, 
like a crumpled lotus. That high-souled one received in- 
formation of all that I had done ; and thereat, waxing 
enraged, the Deity spoke unto me, — “If from this day, thou 
ravish a female by force, thy head certainly shall be riven 
in an hundred pieces. It is for this, that with my mind 
afflicted with fear, I do not violently force, Videha’s daughter 
Sitli, anent lying with her fair self. My rush is like thot of 
the sea, and my motion that of the wind. DScaratha’s aon 
doth not know this, and therefore doth he approach sea. Who 
wisheth to address a lion that is lying asleep in a cave, 
resembling Death wrought up by wrath ? RSma hath not 
seen shafts shot by me, resembling two-tongued serpents,— 
and therefore, it is that he approacheth me. Like a meteor 
burning an elephant, I shall, with shafts shot from bow in 
hundreds, resembling the thunder-bolt, consume Rjma. And 
as at the proper hour the risen Sun defeatelh the splendour 
of the stars, will I, surrounded by a mighty army, overpower 
his strength. Neither the thousand-eyed Visava, nor yet 
Varuna, is capable of fighting me. By the might of this arm 
did I formerly conquer this city, governed by Vai?ravana.” 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




y UDDHA KXNDA M. 






SECTION XIV. 



H BARING the words of the lord of Rlkshasas, as well as 
the thundering of Kumbhakarna, Vibhishana addressed the 
RUkshasa chief, in a pregnant speech, fraught with his welfare) 
— r ‘Thou hast been bound about thy neck by the mighty and 
huge serpent, Sitii, having her breast for its body anxiety for 
its venom, smile for its sharp fangs, and her five fingers for its 
hood. Therefore before the monkeys, resembling mountain- 
peaks, having teeth for their arms and nails for their weapons, 
—subjugate Lanka, do thou render Maithili unto Da^aratha’s 
son. And before the shafts shot by Rama, resembling the 
thunder-bolt and having impetuosity of the wind, cut off the 
heads of the foremost of the RSkshasas, do thou render 
Mithila’s daughter unto the son of Da^aratha. Neither 
Kumbhakarna nor Indrajit, neither Mah5par9wa nor Mahodara, 
neither Nikumbha nor Kumbha nor yet Atikaya, O king, 
can stay in the field against R&ghava. Living, thou, whether 
thou art protected by the Sun or the winds, or throwest 
thyself into the lap itself of Vlsava, or enterest the sky or 
the nether spheres, shall not escape death.” Hearing 
Vibhishana’s words, Prahasta said,— “Fear know we none 
whatever from the celestials, or D&navas, or Yakshas, 
or Gandharbas, or huge snakes ; fear know we none in battle 
with birds and serpents. How can fear at all afflict us 
proceeding from the king's son, R3ma ? Hearing Prahasta's 
speech, Vibhishana, seeking the welfare of the king, and 
having his intellect grounded in virtue, interest and profit, 
said words enfolding high sense,— “O Prahasta, like a sinful 
person being unable to ascend heaven, what the king, 
Mahodara, thou, and Kumbhakarna, are saying with reference 
to R&ma, shall not prove true. As one without a raft cannot 
cross over the mighty main, how can I, or thou, or all the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1140 



RAMAYaNa . 



Rikshas combined, cause death unto Rama, who, O Prahasta, 
is versed in the sense of things. Even the gods become 
stolid before the sovereign of the Ikshw&ku race, having 
righteousness for his principle quality, and being a mighty 
car- warrior and of such a character, and who is competent 
in action. As yet the Kanka-feathered, terrible and sharp 
shafts shot by Raghava, have not pierced into thy body ; 
and therefore thou dost speak so. And, O Prahasta, as yet 
the sharpened shafts, capable of destroying life and having 
the impetuosity of the thunder-bolt, have not entered into 
thy body, and therefore thou dost speak thus, neither Ravana, 
nor the exceedingly powerful Tri^rsha. Neither Kumbha- 
karna’s son Nikumbha nor Indrajit, is capable of bearing 
in battle the son of Da^aratha, resembling Sakra himself. 
And neither Devantaka* nor Narantaka,+ neither Atikaya,]; 
nor the magnanimous Atiratha, nor the equally strong 
Akampana, is competent to stay Raghava in fight. And the 
king, naturally of fierce temper and thoughtless, through the 
instrumentality of ye who appearing to be his friends are 
in reality his foes, seeketh to destroy the Rakshasas. Do 
ye take out and deliver the monarch, who hath through force 
become subject to a dreadful and mighty, and thousand-headed 
serpent bursting with immeasurable prowess. As a person 
possessed by fearfully strong ghosts, is saved by his friends 
pulling him by his hair, attaining your desire ye should, 
assembling together, rescue the king. This one is sunk in 
the RSghava sea having excellent waters. Do ye speedily 
coming together deliver him. He (the king) hath fallen into 
the K&kutstha nether regions, I tell thee my full mind,— 
fraught with the welfare of this city together with the 
R&kshasas, as well of the king with his adherents. Do thou 
make over Maithili unto the son of the king. He is a true 

* Lit . — destroyer of the Deity. — T. 

t Lit .— destroyer of men. — T. 

i Lit. — huge-bodicd. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKlNDAM. 



1141 



counsellor who adviseth his master, after duly ascertaining 
the strength, position, increase or destruction of the enemies 
as well as of their own party. 



SECTION XV. 



Hearing carefully the words of Bibhisana, gifted with 
the intelligence of the lord of speech, the high-souled 
Indrajit, the leader of demons, spake, saying, — “Why art 
thou, O uncle, speaking these useless words like one 
terrified ? He even, who is not born in this race, cannot 
speak or act in this wise. Only one man in this family, my 
uncle Bibhisana, is weak in energy, strength, prowess, 
patience, heroism and vigor. Why art thou O timid one, 
afraid of them since any one of these Rakshasas is capable of 
slaying those two princes, human beings as they are ? The 
master of the three worlds, the lord of the celestials, has been 
brought down by me as captive on this earth. And all the 
celestials smitten with fear fled to different quarters. I 
brought down on earth the loud-roaring celestial elephant 
Aira^ata and uprooted by force its tusks. And all the 
celestials were terrified at this. Am I not, who have shatter- 
ed the pride of the celestials, afflicted the leading Daityas, 
and am gifted with excellent prowess, capable of discomfit- 
ting these two princess — very ordinary mortals as they are ?” 
Hearing the words of (Indrajit) gifted with high energy, 
irrepressible and resembling the lord of celestials, Bibhisana, 
the foremost of those using weapons, addressed him with words, 
fraught with high import, — “O my son, thou art a mere child 
and of unripe intellect and hence thou art not capable of as- 
certaining the propriety and impropriety of counsels. Thou art 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




114 * 



RlMlFANA, 



therefore speakihg thus like a maniac for thy own destruction. 
Thou art known as a son unto Rlvana, 0 Indrajit.but in sooth, 
thou art his foe in disguise, since knowing of his destruction 
from Raghava, thou dost not prevent him. Thou art brave, 
childish and hast been impelled by thy silly understanding. 
Thou shalt be slain along with him who hath brought thee 
in this counsel chamber. Thou art, O Indrajit, foolish, 
imprudent, devoid of humility, of an irritable temper, of feeble 
sense, vicious-minded and of a silly understanding. And 
thou dost speak so, being impelled by childishness Who 
shall withstand in battle, the shafts, shot by RSghava, 
resembling the rod of Death, the stick of Brahman, flaming 
like the Fire of Dissolution. Do thou render back Sita, O 
king, unto RAma, with riches, jewels, excellent ornaments, 
clothes and jems and we shall then be able to live here 
void of grief. ,, 



SECTION XVI. 



BlBHlSHANA addressing him with these excellent and 
auspicious words, fraught with high sense, R&vana, impelled 
by Death, again spake in harsh accents. — “It is better to live 
with open enemies or enraged serpents than with those who 
pass for friends but are in reality foes. I know well the 
nature of kinsmen, in all the worlds, O Rlkhasa,— one takes 
delight in another’s misfortune. The kinsmen, O R&kshasa, 
generally disregard him who is their king,* protecteth the 
kingdom, educated and pious— and they always try to discom- 
fit him, if he be aheroe. These terrible enemies— the kinsmen, 
hypocrite as they are, always take delight in one another’s 

* On account of the priority of his birth— T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUBDHAKlNDAM 



1143 



calamity. Hear, I shall relate what the elephants, in yore, 
spoke beholding some persons with noose in hand— “We do 
not fear, fire, weapons, or eten the terrible noose— we fear 
only the dreadful kinsmen, blinded with selfishness* They 
alone unfold the means of our detection— there is not the least 
doubt about it. Fear from kinsmen is therefore known as the 
worst of all fears. In kine there is milk, in kinsmen, there is 
fear, in women there is fickleness, and in Brahmanas, there is 
asceticism. It doth not please thee, I fancy, 0 gentle one, that 
I am honored of the three worlds, the lord of riches, and the 
subduer of roy foes. As the drops of water do not last long 
on the leaves of lotuses, so is the friendship with unworthy 
persons. As the autumnal clouds, albeit muttering, do not 
pour forth water, so is the friendship with unworthy persons. 
As a bee flies away after sucking up the honey so is the 
friendship with unworthy persons. As a bee, after feeding 
upon the K§9a flowers, doth not get honey so is (fruitless) 
the friendship with unworthy persons. As an elephant, 
after being bathed, covers its body again with dust, taking it 
with its trunk, so is the friendship with unworthy persons,.* 
Fie thee, O monkey, O thou that bringest disgrace on the 
family. Had any one else spoken thus he would have 
ceased tQ live by this time.” Being thus accosted harshly, 
Bibhisana, speaking truth, rose up along with four R&kshasas 
having maces in their hands. “Thereupon, rising up in the 
welkin, the graceful brother Bibhisana, worked up with ire, 
addressed the lord of R&kshasas— Thou art mistaken, O king. 
Do thou speak what thou wishest— thou art my elder brother, 
adorable like unto father— thou dost not follow the track of 
virtue. I cannot tolerate the harsh accents of thine, my 
elder brother.—-For thy welfare I spoke those well-meaning 
words, O Ten-necked one, but thou didst not pay heed to 
them being brought under the control of Death. O king, many 
are the persons who speak sweet words, but rare are they 

* They afterwards forsake their former friends.— T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 





1144 



RlMlFANA. 



who can speak and hear unpalatable but well-meaning words. 
How can I disregard thy death like unto a burning house 
bound as thou art by the noose of Death, the destroyer of all 
creatures. I do not wish to behold thee slain by the well- 
sharpened shafts of Rama, feathered in gold and resembling 
the flaming fire. Even the heroic and powerful persons, well 
versed in the use of weapons, wear away like sands in battle, 
being attracted by Death. Thou art worshipful unto me, do 
thou forgive me for what I have said for thy welfare. Do 
thou protect thyself and this city, abounding in R&kshasas. 
May good betide thee ! I am going away and do thou be 
happy without me. What, I spoke unto thee, O ranger of 
the night, to prevent thee, for thy welfare, did not please 
thee. Persons, whose lease of life is well-nigh expired, do 
not pay heed to the well-meaning words of their friends.” 



SECTION XVII. 

■ 

Having addressed RSvana with these harsh words, his 
younger brother, reached in no time, where Rama along with 
Lakshmana was. The leading monkeys, stationed on earth, 
espied him on the welkin, resembling in size the summit of 
the mount Meru, and burning like lightning in the effulgence 
of his own person. And his four attendants of terrible 
prowess were adorned with excellent ornaments and armed 
with armours and maces. He was like unto a collection of 
clouds, powerful as the thunder-bolt, holding an excellent 
mace, heroic and embellished with excellent ornaments. 
And beholding him along with four counsellors, the highly 
intelligent Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, engaged in medita- 
tion along with them. And meditating for a while, he spoke 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKlNDAM . 



1145 



unto the monkeys headed by Hanum&n the following 
excellent words — “Behold, there comes a Rakshasa, armed 
with various weapons and followed by four demons to 
slay us and there is not the least doubt about it.” And 
hearing the words of Sugriva, the excellent monkeys, takjyog 
up huge trees and crags, bespoke him, — “Do thou order us, 
O king, to destroy these vicious-souled demons. These 
shall crush them to death, limited as is the tenure of their 
life.” They addressing each other in this wise, Bibhisana 
descended from the sky on the northern shore. And 
beholding Sugriva and all others stationed near him, the highly 
intelligent Bibhisana accosted them, at the highest pitch 
of his voice, saying, — “Liveth there the Rakshasa, Ravana, 
the lord of demons, and perpetrator of many iniquitous 
deeds. I am his younger brother known as Bibhisana. By 
him, slaying the vulture YatSLyu, was carried away Sita from 
Janastb&na. She is imprisoned, brought under his sway, 
poorly, and being well guarded by the Rakshasees. With 
various well meaning words and reasonings I pointed out 
unto him, the necessity of rendering back Sita unto Rama. 
And Ravana, possessed by Death, paid no heed to my well- 
meaning words, like unto one, lying on the brink of death, 
neglecting the administration of medicine. Being reviled by 
him and treated harshly like a menial, I have come to seek 
Raghava’s shelter, renouncing my children and wives. Do ye 
soon mention unto the high-souled Raghava, the refuge of 
all creatures, that Bibhisana hath arrived.*' Hearing those 
words the quick-paced Sugriva, excited with ire, spake unto 
Rama, before Lakshinana, saying, — “Forsooth hath an enemy 
entered secretly in our midst and he shall slay us getting 
an opportunity like unto an owl killing the crows. O slayer of 
foes, it now behoveth thee to be particularly careful about the 
counsels, arrangement of soldiers, polity— civil and military 
and spies of our own party as well as those of the enemies. 
These Rakshasas are heroic ; they assume shapes at will, 

144 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1146 



rA/hAtana . 



always lie in ambush and secretly bring about others’ ruin — 
we should not therefore place confidence in them. This 
must be the emissary of Ravana — the lord of Rakshasas. 
Entering in our midst, he shall, in sooth, sow dissensions in 
our camp, or he shall slay us when we are careless, 
confiding in them. Avoiding the enemies, we should now 
collect the forest-rangers our friends and servants. O lord, 
this man is a R&kshasa by birth and the brother of our foe 
and so is he our enemy, how can we trust him ? Ravana’s 
younger brother, known as Bibbishana, hath come here with 
four Rakshasas, to seek thy shelter. O thou the foremost 
of forgiving persons, I consider this Bibhishana, who hath 
been despatched by Ravana, worthy of being slain. Being 
impelled by his wicked intention and commissioned by 
Ravana, this Rakshasa hath come here and secretly by virtue 
of his illussive powers he shall slay thee, O innocent one, 
when thou shalt place confidence in him.” Having thus 
accosted Rama, skilled in the art of speech, that lord of the 
army, Sugriva, well versed in speech, became silent. And 
hearing the words of Sugriva, the mighty Rama spake unto 
the monkeys, near him, headed by Hanuman, saying, — “Ye 
have all heard, the words well grounded in reason, the lord 
of monkeys hath said, regarding Ravana* s younger brother. 
It behoveth him, who desireth for perpetual wealth, and is 
intelligent and capable of giving sound counsels, to advise 
his friends in difficult matters.” Being thus addressed by 
Rama (to minister unto him best counsels) all those monkeys, 
intent upon encompassing his well-being, gave out their 
respective opinions. “O Raghava, there is nothing beyond 
thy knowledge in the three worlds. It is only to show 
thy respect towards us, O RSma, that thou dost accost 
us in this wise. Thou art of truthful vows, heroic, pious, of 
firm prowess, discriminating, recollecting and having implicit 
confidence in thy friends. Let the intelligent and capable 
counsellors deliver their reasonable opinions unto thee.” They 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




y uddhakAndam. 



1147 



speaking thus untoRaghava, the intelligent monkey Angada, 
spoke as follows for sounding the intention of Bibhishana, — 
“We should always suspect him since he has come from the 
side of our enemies, and should not, all on a sudden, place 
confidence in him. The wicked-minded always move about 
hiding their real self, and bring about peoples’ calamity, 
taking advantage of their weak points. And great is the 
disaster thereof. It is always proper to engage in actions, 
considering what is right and what is wrong. Virtues should 
always be gathered and vices abondoned. Do thou renounce 
him unhesitatingly, if dost thou find in himta source of a 
great calamity and do thou embrace him if dost thou find 
him crowned with many virtues.” Thereupon followed 
Sarava with words fraught with high import, — “O best of 
men, do thou speedily despatch emissaries to sound 
Bibhishana. If dost thou, sounding him well through the 
instrumentality of sharp spies, find him friendly, do thou win 
him over to thy side.” Thereupon the wise jSmbhaban, 
arriving at conclusions by virtue of his knowledge of Sastras^ 
began with words, void of defects, — “Surely doth Bibhishana 
come from the vicious lord of Rakshasas, dead set against 
us and hath arrived at such a bad place and in such a bad 
hour. We should always fear him.” And thereupon followed 
Mainda, conversant with what is right and wrong, after due 
deliberation, with words pregnant with reason, — “He is 
Havana* s younger brother, by name Bibhishana. Let the lord 
of men ask him every thing at first in sweet words. Do 
thou first ascertain, O foremost of men, with what intention 
he hath come — evil or good — and then settle what course to 
adopt.” Thereupon spake Hanuman, the foremost of the 
counsellors and well versed in Sastras , in accents sweet, 
glorious and fraught with a high value, — “Even Vrihaspati, 
(the lord of speech) cannot excell thee, capable,* gifted with 
the best of intellect and foremost of those skilled in the art 
* Capable to ascertain the truth of all Sastras. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




RAM A i Ana. 



1148 

of speech, as thou art. And what I know I speak, O king. I 
do so, in the interest of Rama’s work and not impelled by my 
skill in the art of speech, by the pride of being a counsellor, 
by the vanity of being gifted with a high intellect or by the 
desire of speaking for its own sake. What thy counsellors 
have said for ascertaining the good or evil intention of 
Bibhishana appeareth to me as most defective and productive 
of no consequence whatever. It is impossible to sound him 
without any command.* And even to command him now 
for the same appears to me as improper. And as regards the 
despatch of spies, anent what thou hast been advised by 
thy ministers, I do not observe any utility. And what little I 
have thought of, I have something to say (regarding JambabSn’s 
proposal) that Bibhishana hath arrived at such a bad place and 
in such an evil hour. He has really come to a very good place 
and in a very good hour. And truly has he performed a be- 
coming and sensible action by coming here after duly ascer- 
taining that R&vana is a vicious wight and thou art a pious 
person — he is full of vices — thou art gifted with many virtues — 
he is tyrranical and thou art powerful. And what they have 
said, O king, as regards sounding him through secret spies, 
appears to me as one requiring great wisdom. An intelligent 
man, when questioned by any suddenly, suspects many things. 
And if the new-comer be a friend and has come here for his 
own happiness, how greatly shall his mind be changed by 
such a course ? Besides by a sudden questioning it is 
impossible to ascertain the intention of a foreigner. Do thou 
therefore thyself accost him and determine, by his voice, his 
secret motive. I did not however mark anything of his 
wickedness while he spoke ; rather I did observe signs of 
gladness on his countenance. So I do not suspect him. The 
wily can never come fearless and undisturbed. Nor were his 
words cunning. So I do not suspect him. It is not very 
easy to hide one’s real nature. It manifests itself by force. 

To command to relate for what he has come. — T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




YlDDHAKkNDAM . 



1149 



So this action of Bibhishana is not out of place or season. 
When accomplished it shall redound to his own interest. 
Considering well thy preparations for war and RSvana’s vain 
conduct, hearing of Vali’s destruction and Sugriva's 
installation on the throne, he hath, impelled by his good 
sense, come here, desirous of gaining the kingdom. Taking 
these into account, it seems prudent to take him to our side. 
0 thou the foremost of the intelligent, 1 have spoken thus 
considering him sincere. It now behoveth thee to perform 
what thou thinkest proper. ,, 



SECTION XVIII. 



Hearing those words of the Wind-god’s son, the 
irrepressible Rima, conversant with all the Sastras, replied, 
with words expressing his own opinion — “I have also thought 
of some thing regarding Bibhishana. I wish you all, 
interested in my well-being, to hear that. (Bibhishana) hath 
come here as a friend so I cannot forsake him by any means. 
And even if he has come with any evil intent it is not 
culpable for the pious to afford him shelter.” Thereupon 
hearing his words and considering them well, Sugriva, the 
lord of the monkeys, replied in more auspicious* words,— 
“Whether this ranger of the night is sincere or wicked, he 
should never be offered any shelter, since he hath forsaken 
his brother in the midst of these calamities. What reason is 
there to believe that he shall not renounce us in our 
difficulty ?” Hearing the words of the lord of monkeys and 
casting his looks towards them, K&kutstha, having truth 
for his prowess, smiling a little, spake, unto Lakshmana, 

* More reasonable words.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





1150 



RAMA YANA. 



crowned with all the marks of piety, saying— “Without being 
conversant with Sastras , and living in the company of old 
men, none can speak such words as have been uttered by the 
king of the monkeys. There appear unto me, however two 
subtler reasons anent the difference between brothers, 
amongst the kings— one is evident and another mundane. 
There are two classes of foes — one consisting of the members 
of the same line the other of the neighbours. And these 
generally bring about our misfortune whenever any oppor- 
tunity presents itself. And it is for this that he hath come 
here. Those kinsmen, who do not think of one another’s 
mischief, generally long for their respective well-being. But 
even such well-meaning relatives are feared by the kings. 
And hear, I shall relate, what the Sastras say regarding the 
weak points thou hast mentioned as to the advisability of 
taking the enemies to our side. We are not his kinsmen 
and this Rakshasa hath come here with a view to gain the 
kingdom. Even the Rakshasas are wise enough to ascertain 
the proper course — so we must take Bibhishana. If the 
brothers are confident and satisfied with each other they 
generally live together, or else they fear each other and 
ultimately engage in a tumultuous war. And there hath 
sprung up some difference with R&vana and therefore 
Bibhishana hath come here. Nor are, O friend, all brothers 
like Bharata, all sons like me unto their father, all friends 
like thee.” Being thus addressed by Rama, the highly wise 
Sugriva, along with Lakshmana, rose up and bending low his 
head, said — “O thou the best of all forgiving persons, this 
night-ranger hath been despatched by Ravana. I therefore 
think it better to kill him. Being impelled by his vicious 
sense that Rakshasa hath come here to slay us, O innocent 
one, when myself, thou and Lakshmana shall consider ourselves 
secure. Therefore the large-armed Bibhisana, the younger 
brother of the ruthless Ravana, deserves to be slain along 
with his counsellors.” Having thus addressed (Rama) the 



Digitized by 



Google 




yvddhakXndam. 



15* 



foremost of Raghu's race, skilled in art of speech, Sugriva, 
tlie lord of monkey host, equally versed in the art of speech, 
became silent. And hearing the words of Sugriva, and 
weighing them, R§ma again addressed the foremost of 
monkeys with more reasonable accents — “Wicked or other- 
wise, whatever this night-ranger may be, he shall not be able 
to do me the least mischief. Pisachas, Danavas,Yakshas or all 
the Rakshasas on earth, — 1 can slay them all, if I like, with 
the tips of my fingers, O thou the lord of monkeys. I have 
heard of a pigeon adoring and entertaining with its own flesh, 
an enemy who took its shelter. While a pigeon received so 
friendly its enemy, the slayer of its mate, how can I then act 
otherwise, O foremost of the monkeys ? Do thou hear, I 
shall relate, a sacred story, narrated by the great ascetic, the 
truthful Kandu, son of the ascetic Kanya. O slayer of foes, 
even a wicked-minded enemy, if he, with folded palms 
and a poor heart, craveth for thy shelter, should not be 
slain. If an enemy, proud or terrified, seeketh shelter in 
affright, he should be saved by a great man even at the risk 
of his own life. One, who from fear, ignorance or wilfully 
doth not protect him who seeketh his shelter, perpetrateth 
a mighty iniquity, blamed of all. When a person is slain 
before him whose shelter he hath taken he taketh away all 
the virtues of his protector. So great is the sin in not 
affording shelter unto those who seek for it ; it standeth in 
the way of going to heaven, bringeth in calumny and 
destroyeth the strength and prowess. I shall therefore 
follow the excellent words of. Kandu — leading to piety, fame 
and the attainment of the abode of the celestials. I always 
declare ‘no fear 1 unto all creatures, whenever any, approaching 
me, says, *1 am thine' and seeketh my shelter. Even this is 
my pious observance. O Sugriva, O foremost of monkeys, do 
thou soon bring him here, whether he be R&vana or Bibhishana 
and 1 shall declare unto him ‘no fear.' Hearing the words 
of Rama, Sugriva, the lords of those who go bounding, 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




RlMlFANA. 



1152 

over-flowing with friendliness, bespake Kakutstha. — “What 
wonder is there that thou wouldst speak these auspicious 
words, O thou the foremost of kings, conversant with 
morality, gifted with prowess and ever treading the pious 
track as thou art. Truly doth my inner self regard Bibhisana 
as devoid of any wicked intention. He has been well sounded 
by signs and gestures. And let the greatly wise Bibhisana, O 
RAghava, be placed on an equal footing with us and gain 
our friendship. ,, Hearing the words of Sugriva, the lord of 
monkeys, the king of men (Rama) made instantly friends 
with Bibhisana, like unto the conqueror of enemies* cities 
making friends with the king of birds. 



SECTION XIX. 



Raghava thus declaring unto him ‘no fear 1 , R&vana’s 
younger brother, the greatly wise Bibhisana, bending low his 
head, cast his looks on the earth. And descending from the 
welkin with his devoted attendants the virtuous-souled 
Bibhisana, delighted, bowed unto RSma. And thereupon 
touching his feet along with four RSLkshasas, Bibhisana 
addressed R§ma, — with words, fraught with piety, befitting 
the occasion and conducing to pleasure. “I am R&vana's 
younger brother and have been greatly insulted by him/ 1 
have therefore come to seek thy shelter, the refuge of all 
creatures, abandoning Lank! and renouncing my friends and 
riches. My kingdom, life and happiness are all at thy 
disposal. 0 Hearing his words R£ma replied,— comforting 
him with words and favouring him as if with looks. “Do 
thou relate unto me truly the strength and weakness of the 
enemies.” Being thus accosted by R§ma of unwearied 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




VUDDHAKkNDAM. 



l '5i 



actions, the Raksha,began to describe the strength of Ravana. 
“O prince, by virtue of the boon acquired from the 
Self-Create, the Ten-necked one is incapable of being slain 
by all creatures — Gandharbas, serpents, or birds. My elder 
brother — the one next to Ravana — is the heroic and highly 
effulgent Kumbhakarna — Sakra’s equal in battle. Thou mayst 
have heard, O Rama, his commander is Prahasta, by whom 
was defeated Manibhadra on the mount Kaila^a. (His son) 
Indrajit, equipped with invincible armour, bow and finger- 
protector made of the skin of iguana, becomes invisible in 
fight. And, worshipping Fire and becoming invisible, that 
graceful hero, O Raghava, slayeth the enemies in conflict, 
having the contending parties vast and well arranged. 
Mabodara, Mahapar9wa and the Rakshasa, Akampana, are his 
lieutenants, who equal the Lokapalas* in battle. His army 
consists of ten thousand kotis of Rakshasas, wearing shapes 
at will, inhabiting the city of Lanka, and living on flesh and 
gore. And with the Lokpalas and the celestials, they were 
all defeated by the vicious-souled Ravana.” Hearing the 
words of Bibhisana and weighing them in his mind, th^t 
foremost of Raghu’s race said — ‘‘I understand well thlp 
strength and prowess of Ravana, which thou hast depicted 
truly, O Bibhisana. Do thou hear truly that I shall slay the 
Ten-necked one together with Prahasta and his sons, and 
I shall make thee king. Whether he entereth the Rasatalaf 
or the regions under the earth, or seeketh shelter of the 
Grand-father of the celestials, he shall not be able to save 
his life from me. I do swear by my three brethern that I 
shall enter the city of Ayodhya, after slaying in battle 
R&vana with his sons, kinsmen and friends.” Hearing these 
words of Rama of unwearied action, the virtuous-souled 

* Divinities who protect the regions, or the Sun, Moon, Fire, Wind, Indra, 
Yama, Varuna and Kuvera. — T. 

f The seven infernal regions under the earth and the residence of the Ndgas, 
Asuras and Daityas. This is the lowest of the seven divisions of Pftt&la. — T. 

145 



Digitized by 



Google 





1154 



r Am Ay an a. 



(Bibhisana), bowing his head unto him, began — “I shall lend 
thee my might in slaying the Rakshasas and devastating the 
city of Lanka, and shall be in the midst of Ravana’s army.” 
Thereupon, embracing Bibhisana, who spoke thus, Rama, 
delighted, said unto Lakshmana, — “O my brother, do thou 
bring water from the ocean. Sprinkling the greatly wise 
Bibhisana, I shall make him at once the king of the 
Rakshasas, O conferer of honor ; for I am greatly 
pleased with him.” Being thus addressed, Saumitri, at the 
command of the king, annotated Bibhisana and made him 
the king of the Rakshasas in the presence of the monkey- 
host. Beholding Rama's kindness (towards Bibhisana), the 
monkeys eulogized the high-souled one, exclaiming ‘‘Excel- 
lent ! Excellent !” Thereupon, Hanum&n and Sugriva 
addressed Bibhisana, saying, “Do thou tell us how we shall 
cross over the main — the abode of Varuna, along with the 
host of the highly powerful monkeys. Do thou inform us 
of the means by which we may cross over, along with our 
army, the lord of rivers and streams — the abode of Varuna.” 
Being thus addressed, the virtuous-souled Bibhisana replied, 
— “It behoveth the king, RSghava, to seek refuge from the 
Ocean. This measureless deep was dug out by (the king) 
Sagara* And the great Ocean shall surely help Rama 
belonging to Sagara’s race.” Being thus accosted by the 
wise Rakshasa, Bibhishana, Sugriva reached where R&ma 
with Lakshmana was. Thereupon, the broad-necked Sugriva 
began to explain the well-meaning words of Bibhishana, 
requesting Rama Jto seek the shelter of the Ocean. And 
those words pleased Rama, pious by nature. And the 
highly effulgent (hero) requested, smiling, the active Laksh- 
mana and the monkey-chief Sugriva to collect necessariesfor 
his adoration. “O Lakshmana, this counsel of Bibhisana 
appeareth to me as most sound. Sugriva is always greatly 

* Sagara was a sovereign of Ayodhy&, belonging to the same family with 
Rdma. — T. , 



Digitized by 




y LDLHA KANDA M. 



1 1 5 5 



wise, and thou art greatly proficient in counsel. Do ye, hold- 
ing a conference, intimate to me what you think becoming." 
Thus addressed, those two heroes— Lakshmana and 
Sugriva, spoke respectfully the following words fraught 
with propriety, — "Why shall not the well-meaning words of 
Bibhisana expressed now, please us, O Raghava, O thou 
best of men? Without constructing a bridge over the deep, 
the terrible abode of Varuna, even the celestials and their 
lord (Indra) cannot get at the city of Lanka. Do thou 
act on the genuine counsel of the heroic Bibhisana, and 
without losing time, do thou engage the Ocean for this work, 
so that we may with our army proceed to the city of 
Ravana," Being thus addressed Rama reached the shore of 
the lord of rivers and streams, covered with Ku^a, like unto 
fire getting into the sacrificial dais. 



SECTION XX. 



Thereupon the greatly powerful Rakshasa, by name 
Sdrdula, beheld the army of Sugriva arranged on the shore 
of the ocean. And, beholding the army all busy, the emissary 
of the vicious-souled Rakshasa — Ravana, entered the city 
of Lanka and, approaching his lord, said, — "The army of 
monkeys and bears hath approached Lanka. It is immeasur- 
ably deep as the ocean. And those two sons of the king 
Da9aratha — the brothers Rama and Lakshmana, gifted with 
great beauty, coming to rescue Sita, have stationed them- 
selves on the shore of the ocean, O thou of great efful- 
gence. The army of Rama extends over the sky and ten 
yoyanas. I have come, O great king, to acquaint thee with the 
real truth. And, knowing everything, it behoveth thy 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1156 



RAmAI'aNa. 



emissaries, O king, to settle whether to render back Sita, 
to adopt measures of conciliation, or to sow dissensions 
in the enemy's camp.” Hearing the words of S ardula, 
Ravana, the lord of Rakshasas, being anxious to ascertain 
his duty, addressed a Rakshasa by name Suka, the most 
sensible of his counsellors, with the following pregnant words, 
— ‘‘Do thou go and communicate unto king Sugriva my 
behest, in becoming and excellent accents. ‘Thou art born 
of a great family and art the mighty son of the king of bears. 

1 have no dissension with thee. In fact I consider thee as 
my brother, O king of monkeys. Though I have stolen the 
spouse of the high-souled prince (R§ma), yet what is that to 
thee, O Sugriva ? Do thou return to Kishkindha. The 
monkeys shall not by any means be able to attack the city 
of Lanka. Even the celestials and Gandharbas could not — 
what of these men and monkeys ?” And being thus 
commissioned by the lord of Rakshasas, that night-ranger 
assumed the shape of a bird and, bounding, speedily reached 
the sky. And, proceeding far over the deep and stationing 
himself at the welkin, he spoke unto Sugriva all the words 
with which he was addressed by the vicious-souled Ravana. 
Hearing him speak thus, the monkeys leaped up quickly and 
reached there with a view to chop off his wings or to slay him 
with their clenched fists. On being seized vehemently by all 
these monkeys, that night-ranger was brought down speedily 
from the sky to the earth. And being assailed by the monkeys, 
Suka said, — “O Kakutstha, it doth not behove (people) to slay 
an emissary. Do thou therefore prevent the monkeys. He who 
passing by his master’s behest, giveth out his own intention, 
is not faithful ; and he therefore deserveth to be slain.” 
Hearing the piteous accents of Suka, Rama spake unto the 
monkeys, who were about to kill him, saying, “Do not kill 
him/’ And again stationing himself on the welkin, that 
night-ranger said,— ‘*0 Sugriva, O thou gifted witlugreat 
energy, O thou of great prowess, what shall I speak unto 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




yuddhakAndam. 



i*57 



Ravana, dreaded by all people ?” Being thus addressed, that 
mighty king of monkeys, the bull among them, of unwearied 
energy, spake unto that emissary — the night-ranger, Suka, 
saying — “O Ravana, thou art not mv friend or an object of 
pity. Thou art not my benefactor, nor art liked by me. Thou 
art Rama’s enemy, and thou dost therefore deserve to be slain 
by him like Vali along with thy friends and relatives. I shall 
therefore slay thee, O king of night-rangers, together with 
thy sons, friends and relatives. And I shall have the whole 
city of LankS reduced to ashes by my mighty force. Thou 
shalt not be able to escape Raghava, O Ravana, O thou who 
hast lost thy sense, even if thou art protected by the celestials. 
And thou shalt with thy brother be slain by Rama, even if 
thou dost fly into the sky, enter into the regions under the 
earth, or seek shelter of Mahadeva. I do not behold any in 
these three worlds — Pisacha, Rakshasa, Gandharba, or Asura, 
who can protect thee. Thou hast slain the monarch of vul- 
tures, who had grown decrepit through age.* Thou hast carried 
off the large-eyed Sit§ from the vicinity of Rama and the 
neighbourhood of Lakshmana ; but, having captured her, thou 
understandest not (thy native strength). Nor dost thou 
understand that foremost of Raghus, high-souled, possessed 
of great strength, and incapable of being repressed even by 
the celestials, — who shall take thy life.” Then spake that 
best of monkeys, Angada, son of Vali, — ”0 highly wise one, 
this is no emissary. This one clearly appeareth to me as a spy. 
He hath come to form an estimate of thy entire army. Take 
him. Let him not go (back) to Lanka. This is indeed what 
I would.” Thereat, commanded by the king, the monkeys, 
springing up, seized (Suka) and bound him, as he burst out 
bewailing like one forlorn. On being sorely handled by the 

* The commentator has a queer and characteristic note on Jardvriddha — 
decrepit through age. One that is old , may stave off decrepitude through some 
drug, while a youthful person may come by the same in consequence of some 
curse. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1158 



KhMA IAN A. 



relentless monkeys, Suka cried unto the high-souled Rama, 
son of Da£aratha, — “They by main force sever my wings, 
and they pierce my eyes. If I lose my life, may all the evil 
deeds that I have committed between the night when I was 
born and the night when I shall die, be thine |” Hearing 
this pitiful cry, Rama prevented (the monkeys) 5 and he said 
unto them,— “Let go this envoy, who hath come here.” 



SECTION X X|. 

Then on the shore of the sea, Raghava, spreading 
darbha, with his hands joined towards the great deep, laid 
him down, with his face to the East. And that slayer of foes 
(lay down), making his pillow his arm resembling the shining 
form of a serpent ; always dight with golden ornaments ; 
full many a time pressed with the palms of beauteous 
damsels * decked with jewelled golden Keyuras and superb 
ornaments studded with pearls ; smeared from above with 
sandal and aguru ; (his arm) which formerly had been graced 
in bed with the head of SitS. ; like unto the body of Takshaka 
under the waters of the Ganga ; resembling a yoke ; in 
battle increasing the sorrow of foes and enhancing for long 
the delight of friends ; — his left arm having its skin 
destroyed by the strokes of the bow-string ; which was the 
refuge of the entire earth ; — his right arm resembling a 
mighty bludgeon, — the donor of thousands of kine, — making 
this great arm his pillow (he laid him down). “To-day either 
I shall die, or shall the Ocean.” — Having thus formed his 



* The commentator appropriately remarks : Rama was wedded to a 

single wife ■ these damsels must mean nurses attending on him — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





YbbDHAKkNDAM. 



1 59 



resolution in respect of the great deep, Rama, restraining 
his speech, with a concentrated mind lay down there 
agreeably to rule. And as Rama slept on the earth on Ku^a 
spread over, without ever swerving from the rule, three 
nights passed away. And while spending three nights, 
Rama, learned in polity and attached to virtue, prayed unto 
that lord of streams— the Ocean. Yet the wicked Ocean, 
albeit adored according to his deserts by Rama with his 
mind concentrated, did not show himself. Thereat Rama' 
grew enraged and had the corners of his eyes crimsoned ; 
and he spake unto Lakshmana of auspicious marks, saying, — 
‘ Behold the hauteur of the Ocean in not presenting himself 
before me. Calmness, forbearance, candour, and soft speech— 
these virtues of the good are by the insolent taken for the 
effects of incompetency. The person* that is self-laudatory, 
wicked, and badly-bold, publisheth his own praise, and meteth 
out chastisement everywhere, t is honored in the world. By 
moderation one cannot attain celebrity, by moderation one 
cannot attain fame, — and, O Lakshmana, in this world by 
moderation one cannot attain victory on ‘the edge of battle/J 
See, 0 Sumitra’s son, the abode of Makaras, with his waters 
obstructed all around with Makaras destroyed by my shafts. 
And, 0 Lakshmana, see the bodies here of serpents, and the 
huge bodies of mighty fishes, and the trunks of elephants,— 
torn by my arrows. And to-day in terrible battle-will I 
dry up the Ocean with conchs and oysters, and fishes and 
Makaras. This abode of Makaras taketli me, wdio is forbearing, 
to be incompetent. Fie on forbearance towards such as he ! 
In consequence of my moderation, Ocean showeth not his 
own form. O Saumitri, bring thou my bow, my arrows 
resembling venomous snakes. I will dry up the Ocean, and 



* The word, however, is naram (ac.J, man. — T. 
f i. e. indiscriminately. — T. 

} Rana murddhani , — ‘The perilous edge of battle when it raged.* 

Par. Lost ., Bk. I. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




n6o 



RAM A I'ANa. 



the monkeys shall go over on foot. And, being angered, 
to-day, albeit incapable of being agitated, will l agitate the 
deep. And by means of my shafts will I make Vanina* s 
abode, surging with a thousand billows and having his 
dignity maintained by his shores, — overleap his continents. 
And I will agitate the deep harbouring numbers of mighty 
Danavas.” Having spoken thus, Rama, equipped with his 
bow, with his eyes dilated in wrath, became exceedingly 
irrepressible, like unto the flaming fire at the final dissolution. 
And straining his dreadful bow, making the earth shake, 
tremulously, he let fly fierce shafts like him of an hundred 
sacrifices hurling his thunder-bolt. Thereat, flaming up, those 
vehement choice shafts surcharged with energy, enter into 
the waters of the sea, with its serpents afflicted with fear. 
And then great and exceedingly dreadful was the motion of 
the sea, with fishes and Makaras, and with the roar of the 
winds (blowing there). And on a sudden the mighty deep 
was heaving with mighty surges, with conchs scattered about, 
and a smoke (enveloped) the ocean ; and the billows became 
visible on all sides. And the serpents were distressed, with 
their faces flaming and their eyes aglow ; as well as the 
Danavas of terrific energy, and the dwellers of the nether 
spheres. And billows of the sovran Ocean, resembling 
Vindhya or Mandara, containing crocodiles and Makaras, 
sprang up by thousands. And Vanina* s abode had its surges 
whirling, its serpents and Rakshasas seized with affright, and 
its ferocious aquatic animals borne all around ; and it sent 
forth sounds. Then Sumitra’s son, springing up, said unto 
Raghava of fiery vehemence, as he sighed and kept stretching 
his matchless bow. — “This must not be.” And he took away 
his (Rama’s) bow. “Without doing this unto the Ocean, thou, 
supreme of heroes, mayst have thy work accomplished. 
Personages like thee do not come under the influence of 
passion. Do thou deliberately look about for some worthy 
means (for compassing thy end.;” Then remaining invisible 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




FUDDHAKlNDAM. 



1161 

in the sky, Brahmarshis and Surarsliis * exclaiming, — “Well- 
a-day 1” and “Do’nt,” in loud accents ejaculated, — (Oh ! and 
alas !) 



SECTION XXII. 



Then the foremost of Raghus addressed Ocean in stern 
words, saying, -“To-day will I dry up the Ocean along with 
the nether regions. And, O Ocean, thy waters being burnt 
up by my shafts, and thou being dried up, with thy (aquatic) 
animals slaughtered, a mighty volume of dust shall arise 
(from thy bed). And, O Ocean, in consequence of the arrowy 
shower discharged from my bow, the monkeys shall go over 
to the further shore on foot. Having attained dimensions 
in consequence of access of waters, thou knowest not my 
manliness or my prowess, But, O abode of Danavas, grief 
shalt thou reap at my hands.” Then fixing an arrow resembl- 
ing the rod of Brahmi, with a Brahma Mantra, on the best 
of bows, that exceedingly strong on drew it. And as Raghava 
suddenly stretched his bow, heaven and earth seemed to be 
riven, and the mountains trembled. And darkness covered 
the world, and the cardinal points became invisible. And 
at once the watery expanses and rivers were agitated. And 
the stars appeared simultaneously with the Sun and Moon.f 
And the sky was illumined with the rays of the Sun, and yet 
it was overspread with darkness ; and it burned with an 
hundred meteors. And thunder-bolts sending forth sounds 
surpassing all others, dropped from the firmament. And the 

* Celestial saints. 

t The phenomenon, remarks the commentator, was owing to the heavenly 
bodies obstructing each other’s orbit. — T. 

146 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





1 1 62 



RAM AY aNa. 



winds began to A>low violently; breaking down trees and 
momentarily scattering clouds ; damaging mountain-tops and 
shattering summits. And then the dread and mighty thunders 
possessing impetuous speed and emitting tremendous roars, — 
coming together, produced lightning flashes. And those 
creatures that could be seen, uttered sounds resembling the 
thunder ; and those that were invisible gave forth frightful 
cries. And overwhelmed with fright, and quaking (for fear), 
the creatures began to measure their lengths, — and they were 
sore afflicted, and bereft of motion through terror. And then 
the mighty deep with its animals, and with its waters and 
waves, and with its serpents and Rakshasas, was suddenly 
wrought up with a violent motion. And albeit it was not the 
occasion of the universal dissolution, the Ocean passed 
beyond his shores for a full hundred yoyanas. And seeing 
the elated Ocean — lord of streams and rivers — thus overpass 
his bounds, that destroyer of enemies, Raghu’s son, Rama, 
was not moved * Then from forth the mid-sea arose Ocean 
himself, even as the maker of day riseth from the mighty 
ascending-hill, Meru. And accompanied by Pannagasf of 
flaming faces, the Ocean showed himself, appearing like cool 
lapises, adorned with golden ornaments, — wearing a wreath 
of gems and a jewelled vesture, with his eyes resembling 
lotus-leaves, bearing on his head a noble garland containing 
all flowers ; decked with ornaments of polished gold ; as well 
with excellent ornaments of gems originating in himself, like 
the mountain Himavan embellished with metals (sprung in 
himself), — (the Ocean arose) with wave on wave whirling 
around, and rife with winds blowing among clouds, — surround- 
ed by streams, Ganga, Sindhu (and others). And approaching 
the arrow-showering Raina, and greeting him fair, Ocean 
•spoke unto him with joined hands, — “O RSghava, earth, air, 

* Ndtichakrdma may also mean, ( Rdma ) did not discharge any more 
arrows. — T. 

t Semi-divine serpents. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




iuddhakAndam. 



1163 



sky, water and light,— these, O mild one, retaining their 
eternal course, maintain their (respective) natures. Mine 
also is that nature whereby I am fathomless and incapable of 
being crossed. The reverse of this is the having a bottom. 
And for this reason I speak to thee (concerning the means'. 

0 king’s son, not from desire, or covetuousness, or fear, or 
anger, can I anywise deprive my waters abounding in 
alligators of their (perpetual) motion. I will tell thee how 
thou wilt pass (over me) ; and 1 will bear it. And no 
ferocious aquatic animals shall do wrong so long as thy forces 
have not crossed. And, O Rama, I will make as it were firm 
land for the crossing over of the monkeys.” Then Rama 
said, — “O Vanina’ s abode, listen to me ! This arrow (of mine) 
must accomplish the end (intended). Where shall I let it 
light?” Hearing Rama’s speech, and looking at the mighty 
arrow, that exceedingly energetic one, the great Deep, 
addressed RSLghava, saying, — “There is a certain spot of mine 
in the North, which is more sacred (than the rest). It is 
famed as Drumakulya, even as thou art famed in the world. 
There are there many robbers of ferocious forms and actions, 
-—wicked wights, headed by cow-herds, — who drink of my 
water. These persons of unrighteous acts touch me, and 

1 cannot bear this sin. O Rama, do thou at that place render 
this best of arrow’s successful .’ 9 Hearing the words of the 
high-souled Ocean, (Rama) immediately after,* let fly that 
flaming shaft. And the place where the arrow resembling 
the thunder-bolt and vajra in splendour, alighted, hath been 
celebrated on earth as Marukantara. And hurt with the 
dart, the Earth emitted roars ; and in consequence of this, 
water began to gush out at the mouth of the wound from the 
subterranean regions. And this then became well-known 
asVrana; and there are seen the waters of the Ocean spring 
up. And there arose a terrific report of riving. And owing 

* Sdgaradarfandt — may also mean, agreeably to the Ocean’s instruc- 
tion.^. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



1164 



rAmA y a na. 



to this,* as well as the incident of the arrow, the water that 
existed in the tanks, was dried up. Having dried up 
Maruk&nt&ra famous throughout the three regions, as well as 
the reservoirs of water, R&ma the son of Da9aratha, learned 
and of god-like prowess, conferred a boon on the desert, 
saying, — “This place shall be filled with food nourishing 
beasts ; and ailments shall be rare here. And the fruits and 
roots shall be replete with relish ; and it shall abound in oil 
and overflow with milk ; and it shall contain various odorous 
drugs.” Thus did the desert come to possess these attributes; 
and from R§ma’s bestowal of a boon, it attained a pleasant 
aspect. On that place being burnt up, that lord of streams, 
the Ocean, thus spake unto Raghava, versed in every branch 
of learning,— “O mild one, this one is named Nala, son unto 
Vi^wakarmS. He hath received a boon from his sire. 

Vi9wakarma / s son is well pleased with thee. Let this 
monkey, surcharged with exhuberant spirits, build a bridge 
over me. I will hold that up. This one is as his sire.” 
Having delivered himself thus, Ocean disappeared. Then 
that foremost of monkeys, Nala, arising, spoke unto the 
mighty Rama,— “Resorting to my sire’s skill, I will build a 
bridge over the spacious abode of Makaras. The mighty 
Ocean hath spoken justly. In respect of the ingrate even 
chastisement is supreme in this world, — this is my conviction. 
Down with forbearance, or moderation, or gift ! This dreadful 
Ocean, this mighty deep, expecting to see a bridge (thrown 
over him), hath granted depth unto RSghava. — (Formerly) in 
Mandara, Viswakarma had conferred a boon on my mother : 
‘O exalted one, thy son shall be like me.’ I am a son of his, 
sprung from his loins, and I am like unto Vi9wakarma. Not 
having been asked by thee, I had not unfolded my qualifica- 
tions. I also am capable of constructing a bridge over 
Varuna’s abode. Therefore this very day let the foremost 
urnnkeys construct the bridge.” Then directed by Rima, the 

♦ i. e. the sound . 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUnDHAKlNDAM 



1165 



principal monkeys with alacrity entered the mighty forest in 
hundreds and thousands. And themselves resembling 
mountains, the foremost of the monkeys began to break down 
trees and draw them towards the Ocean. And the monkeys 
filled the Ocean with salas , and agwakarnas ) dhavas , bamboos 
and kutajas , arjunas , palms, tilakas , ttnigas , billakas , 
saptaparnasy and blossoming karnikdras , mangoes, and 
a^oka trees. And those monkeys — the foremost of their 
species — began to gather the trees, some with their roots, 
and some without them,— carrying them like Indra’s ensign. 
And those huge-bodied monkeys possessed of prodigious 
strength, procured palms and pomegranates, cocoanuts and 
Vibhitakas, Kariras, Vakulas, and Nimbas,— * as well as rocks, 
measuring elephants’ dimensions ; and uprooting crags, they 
carried them by means of machines. And on rocks being 
plunged into the waters, the latter, suddenly swelling up, 
mounted to the welkin, and again subsided. — And (the trees) 
dropping (into the deep), vexed it all around. And some 
took lines (for insuring straightness unto the bridge). And 
at the middle of the lord of rivers and streams, Nala made a 
grand bridge measuring an hundred yoyanas . And then he 
set about constructing the bridge with the assistance of 
monkeys of dreadful deeds. And some took the measuring 
rod, and others bore (timber to the sea). And by help of 
hundreds of monkeys following RSma’s mandate, hued like 
clouds or mountains, (they) constructed a bridge with grass, 
and wood. And the monkeys made the bridge of trees with 
blossoming tops. And (monkeys) resembling DSinavas were 
seen rushing all around with rocks resembling hills, and 
mountain-summits. And tremendous was the tumult that 
arose of crags thrown and rocks toppled down into the 
mighty deep. And on the first day the elephant-like monkeys 
full of spirits and exerting themselves vigorously, finished 
fourteen yoyanas . And the exceedingly strong and huge- 
bodied monkeys on the second day speedily disposed of 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1 166 



rAmAvaNa. 



twenty yoyanas . And on the third day the huge-bodied active 
monkeys did one and twenty yoyanas on the sea. And on 
the fourth day the exceedingly impetuous monkeys, bestirring 
themselves vigorously, did two and twenty yoyanas. And on 
the fifth day the fast-speeding monkeys accomplished three 
and twenty yoyanas reaching unto the fair shore. And 
resembling his sire,^ that best of monkeys, the lusty and 
graceful offspring of VigwakarmS, (thus) constructed the 
bridge over the sea. And that bridge built by force over the 
abode of makaras , looked graceful and splendid like the 
Milky way in the firmament. And then the deities and 
Gandharbas, the Siddhas and the prime saints, appearing 
in the heavens, stood there, eager to behold this wonder. 
And the gods and Gandharbas saw that bridge of Nala, 
difficult of being made, having an area of ten yoyanas and 
measuring an hundred in length. And the monkeys, leaping 
and bounding and roaring, as well as all creatures, beheld 
that building of the bridge on the ocean, inconceivable, and 
marvellous, displaying skill past thought and capable of 
making one's hair stand on end. And those thousands of 
Kotis of exceeding vigor, having constructed the bridge over 
the ocean, went over to the other shore of the mighty main. 
And spacious, skillfully constructed, graceful, well-paved and 
nicely finished, the great bridge appeared like the line where 
the hair hath been parted on the Oceans head. Then on the 
other shore of the ocean, Bibhishana,with the view of opposing 
foes (that might advance), stationed himself mace in hand, 
along with some councilors. Then Sugriva spoke unto Rama 
having truth for his prowess, — : “Do thou get upon Hanuman, 
and let Laskhmana get upon Angada. O hero, vast is this 
Ocean— abode of Makaras. These monkeys, rangers of the 
sky, shall hold you up both.” Thereat the graceful and 
righteous Rtma along with Lakshmana, equipped with his 
bow, set out in the van of the army in company with Sugriva. 
And some monkeys proceeded along the middle, and some 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




FVDDHA KXN DA M % 



1167 



plunged into the deep, and some went by the road. And 
some coursed through the air, bounding up bird-like. And 
that dreadful array of monkeys crossing over, with its 
mighty uproar drowned the dreadful roar of the deep, which 
had been arising. On the monkey-host having crossed by 
the bridge of Nala, the king stationed it on the shore 
abounding in fruits, roots and water. Beholding that work 
of K&ghava incapable of being performed, the deities together 
with the Siddhas and ChSranas, and the Miharshis, suddenly 
presenting themselves before Rama, sprinkled him'one by 
one with sacred water, and said, — “Mayst thou be victorious, 
0 human-divine one ! Rule thou the Earth eternally !” 
Thus in various auspicious words, did they pay homage unto 
that one honored by the Brahmanas, Rama. 



SECTION XXIII. 



Having seen omens, that one, Lakshmana’s elder brother, 
conversant with them, embracing the son of Sumitra, said 
these words, — “O Lakshmana, occupying (this tract) of cool 
waters and woods affluent with fruits, will we, dividing and 
arranging our forces, stay here. Mighty is the fear that 
1 see at hand, — boding destruction to people and the 
slaughter of the foremost heroes of bears, monkeys and 
Rakshasas. The wind bloweth darkly, and the Earth 
shaketh. The tops of the mountains tremble, and trees 
topple down. And the clouds are ashen and roistering, 
and roar roughly. And lowering, they shower portentous 
drops of blood. And the twilight is terrible and looketh 
like the red sandal. And a fiery circle droppeth from the 
flaming sun. And on all sides birds and beasts, distressed, 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




ti6S . 



RlMlrANA. 



uttering woe-begone notes, and grim-visaged, set up cries 
against the sun, arousing great (ear. And the Moon, 
although not appearing* in the night, burneth, and with 
dark and red rays riseth, as if it intended to exterminate 
people. And the aspect (of the sun) is slight, rough, and 
good;t and, O Lakshmana, a blue mark is visible on the 
unclouded Sun. And the stars seem erased by a mighty 
volume of dust. O Lakshmana, behold this sight disastrous 
to people like unto the universal dissolution. Crows, and 
hawks, and the inferior vultures, wheel all round. And 
jackals are sending inauspicious yells, exciting great fear. 
The earth shall be covered with darts and javelins, and 
swords discharged by monkeys and RSkshasas, and be 
turned into mire with flesh and gore. Surrounded by all the 
monkeys, will we, using speed, this very day rapidly enter 
into the city ruled by Rlvana, incapable of being subdued.” 
Having said this, that subduer in conflict, that lord, that 
enchanter of men, Rama,J equipped with his bow, proceeded 
in the direction of LankS. And all the principal monkeys— 
Sugriva with Bibhishana — went on, setting up roars, for the 
destruction of foes, who were determined to battle with them. 
And consequently Raghu’s son was well pleased with the 
fortitude and exertions of the powerful monkeys, for bringing 
about what was dear unto R&ghava. 

* The moon, it seems, doth appear, but does not look out clearly. — T. 
f Prafasta — I do not see the propriety of this epithet in this connection. 
This may be a mistake. — T. 

X The word Rdma occurs twice, one being the cognomen of the solar herd. 
The other means, the enchanter of men. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




y UDDHA KkND A M. 



1169 



SECTION XXIV. 



-A.ND with the presence of the king* that assembly of X 
heroes looked beautiful, as doth the autumnal night, garnished 
with beauteous stars, with the Moon. And oppressed with / 
the bursting energy of the host resembling the ocean, the 
Earth trembled. And then the rangers of the forest heard 
a hubbub in Lanka, as well as the sounds of trumpets and 
Mridangas, mighty and capable of making people’s down 
stand on end. And at those sounds, the leaders of monkey- 
bands were delighted beyond measure, and, resenting the 
same, set up cries louder than those sounds. And the 
Rakshasas also heard the roars of the monkeys, resembling 
the rumbling of haughty clouds in the sky. Beholding Lanka 
with variegated standards, and streamers, Dafaratha’s son 
wentf to Sita with an aggrieved heart. “Here that one 
having eyes resembling those of a young deer, is confined 
by Ravana, like unto Rohini overpowered by the red-bodied 
planet.”}: And, sighing hot and long, and looking at 

Lakshuiana, that hero spoke words fraught with his good 
at that time, — “Behold, O Lakshmana, Lanka towering up 
as if piercing the heavens ; and, built by Vi?wakarma on the 
brow of the mountain, she seems to have been made by the 
Mind. Constructed in time past with edifices thronging her, 
Lanka looks like the all-encasing air, covered with pale 
clouds. Lanka is embellished with groves resembling 
Chitraratha, fair, and eloquent with the notes of various 
birds, and fraught with fruits and flowers. Behold the 
intoxicated birds, and the black bees blending (with the 
blossoms). And the blessed breeze swayeth the trees vocal 

* R&ma. — T. 
f i.e. mentally. — T. 
t Ang&raka. — T. 

147 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1170 



RAM A FAN A. 



with the coels.” Having divided his forces there agreeably 
to the directions of the scriptures, Da9aratha’s son, Rama, 
thus spoke unto Lakshmana. And he ordered that monkey- 
army, saying, — “Taking his own forces, let the puissant and 
invincible Angada along with Nila, station himself in the 
centre of the forces. And let the monkey, named Rishabha, 
surrounded by numbers of monkeys, post himself at the 
right of the monkey-army. And let the active and 
irrepressible Gandhamadana, resembling an elephant fragrant 
with the temporal exudation, stay, occupying the left of the 
forces. I myself along with Lakshmana, shall heedfully stay 
in the fore-front. And the monkeys, J&mvabSn, Sushena 
and Vagadarsi, the three high-souled, foremost bears,*— 
shall protect the interior (of the forces). And as the Sun, 
surcharged with energy, protects the hind half of the globe, 
let the monkey-monarch protect the rear of the monkey- 
army.” And that army being skilfully divided into parts 
and protected by great monkeys, resembled the welkin 
covered with clouds. Then, taking up mountain-peaks and 
mighty trees, the monkeys began to proceed towards LankS, 
burning to crush Lanka in battle. “We shall demolish Lanka 
by hurling mountain-peaks, or with our clenched fists.” Thus 
did the foremost of monkeys think in their minds. Then the 
exceedingly energetic Rama addressed Sugriva, saying,— 
‘•Our forces have been rightly marshalled, — let go (now) Suka.” 
Hearing Rama's words, the lord of monkeys possessed of 
great strength, liberated the envoy, Suka, at the command 
of Rama. Liberated at the word of Rama, Suka, who had 
been sore tormented by the monkeys, oppressed with 
exceeding great fear, went to the lord of Rakshasas. There- 
at, Ravana, laughing, said unto Suka, — “Are thy wings 
fettered? And thou seemst as if thy wings had been 

* The epithet ‘bears’ coming after ‘monkeys’ may look incongruous ; but, I 
fancy, ‘monkeys* is used in the general sense of being connected with the 
monkey -host .— 7\ 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





YVDDHAKlNDAM . 



1171 

severed. Why ? Didst thou come under the control of the 
volatile (monkeys) ?” Thereat, exercised with fear, Suka, 
commanded by the monarch, answered the lord of R&kshasas 
in this excellent speech, saying, — “Repairing to the northern 
shore of the sea, I, pacifying (the monkeys) with mild speech, 
communicated thy tidings clearly (unto Sugriva). Thereat, 
as soon as they saw irie, the monkeys flying into a wrath, 
captured me, and attempted to clip my wings and slay me 
with their clenched fists. They are insuseptible of being 
spoken to. No doubt whatever can exist that, O lord of 
Rakshasas, the monkeys are by nature wrathful and fierce. 
The same RSma that hath slain Viradha and Kavandha and 
Khara, hath arrived (here) along with Sugriva, searching 
for the whereabouts of Sita. Having thrown a bridge across 
the brine and crossed the salt sea, Raghava, equipped with 
his bow, stayeth here, setting the Rakshas at naught. And 
the hosts consisting of thousands of bears and monkeys, 
resembling hills and clouds, envelope the Earth. And peace 
there can be none between the forces of the R&kshasas 
and the hosts of the sovereign of monkeys, like unto the 
deities and the Danavas. And they advance before the wall. 
Speedily do one of these things — make over Sit§ without 
delay, or give (him) battle.” Hearing Suka's speech, Ravana 
with his eyes reddened in wrath, spoke, as if burning (Suka) 
with them, — “Even if gods, and Gandharbas, and Danavas 
should array themselves against me, I will not from fear of 
all creatures, render (back) Sita. When shall my shafts 
pursue Raghava, like maddened Bhramaras making towards 
blossomy trees in spring ? When by means of flaming shafts 
shot from my bow shall I burn (Raghava) with his body 
bathed in blood, even as a meteor (burneth) an elephant ? 
And when, surrounded by a mighty host, shall I confound his 
ranks, even as the Sun arising, (vanquisheth) the light of the 
stellar spheres? My impetuosity like the Ocean's, my 
strength like the Wind’s, Dacarathi doth not know, — and 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1172 



RAAJA / Ana. 



therefore it is that he desireth to fight with me. Rama hath 
not seen my shafts resting in the quiver, resembling venomous 
serpents, — and therefore it is that he seeketh to fight with 
me. Raghava hath not in conflict formerly known my bow 
representing my Vina sounded with my shafts; having 
tremendous sounds proceeding from the strings ; dreadful; 
with the cries of distressed people for its mighty strains of 
music; and resonant with the reports of Narachas and palms. 
And, having bathed in the great field of battle representing 
the river of hostile forces, I will in the encounter strike 
(this Vina). Neither the thousand-eyed Vasava, nor Varuna 
himself, can (cope) with me in battle ; nor can Yama, or 
Vaicravana’s self vanquish me in mighty conflict with the fire 
of arrows.” 



SECTION xxv. 



On Dagaratha’s son, RSma, having crossed the Ocean 
with his forces, the graceful Ravana addressed his two 
counsellors, Suka and Sarana, .saying, — “The crossing the 
entire ocean incapable of being crossed, by the monkey- 
forces, and the building over the sea of the bridge by Rama — 
all this had never happened before. The construction of a 
bridge over the ocean cannot at all command credence. But 
(however it be), I must enumerate the monkey-hosts. Entering 
the monkey-army unobserved, it behoveth you to ascertain 
the magnitude thereof, its strength, who are the foremost 
monkeys, who are the councilors assembled there of Rama, 
and who of Sugriva, who range at the head, who among the 
monkeys are heroic ; how they have constructed the bridge 
over the water of the ocean ; how the high-souled monkeys 



Digitized by v^ooQfe 



y UDDHA KKNl)A M . 



11 73 



stay there ; Rama’s, as well as Lakshmana’s purpose, prowess 
and the arms (they fight with). And who is the commander of 
those magnanimous monkeys ? Having learnt all this truly, ye 
ought to return speedily.” Being thus commissioned, these 
heroes, the Rakshasas, Suka and Sarana, assuming monkey- 
shapes, entered into the hosts of monkeys. But Suka and 
Sirana could not number that army of monkeys, incompre- 
hensible and capable of making people’s hair stand on end. 
The forces were on mountain-tops, by fountains and in caves. 
And those rangers of the night beheld those forces, some 
having already crossed, and some crossing, and some intent 
on doing so ; and some having sat down and some sitting— 
that mighty army sending terrific roars, — that ocean of hosts 
incapable of being disturbed. As they remained thus 
disguised, they were discovered by Vibhishana. Thereat, 
taking them captive, he unfolded (the fact) unto Rama, 
saying, — “These are the counsellors of the lord of Rakshasas 
— Suka and SSrana. O captor of hostile capitals, they have 
come as spies from Lanka.” Seeing Rama, they were greatly 
afflicted, and, despairing of their lives and exercised with 
fear, with joined hands, saidy— “O placid one, cammanded by 
Ravana, we have come here, O son of Raghu, for the purpose 
of gathering information concerning this army.” Hearing 
their speech, Rama— son unto Da9aratha — ever engaged in 
the welfare of all beings, laughing, remarked, — “If you have 
heedfully noted this entire array, or if you have done what ye 
had been commanded to do, return in peace. If aught 
remaineth unseen, do ye see it anew. Or Vibhishana will 
again fully show it unto you. Having been taken, ye need 
not fear on the score of your lives. Even if envoys happen 
to be taken who are equipped with weapons, they should not 
be slain. And albeit these night-rangers have come as spies 
in disguise, with the view of creating division among their 
foes, yet, O Vibhishana, let them off. Entering the extensive 
Lanka, ye should say unto the king — younger brother unto 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




174 



RAmAvaNA. 



the Dispenser of riches— the words which I utter,— ‘That 
force relying on which thou hast carried away my Sita, do 
thou as thou wishest, along with thy forces and friends, 
display the same. On the morning of the morrow behold the 
city of Lanka with her wall and gates, as well as the hosts of 
Rakshasas, destroyed by me with my shafts. And as 
VeLsava equipped with the thunder-bolt hurleth the same 
amidst the Danavas, will I, O Ravana, on the morning of the 
morrow pour down my dreadful ire upon thee along with thy 
forces.”’ Thus directed (by Rama), those Rakshasas, Suka 
and Sarana, having saluted the righteous Raghava with 
‘Victory !/ came (back) to Lanki. and spoke unto the lord of 
R&kshasas, saying, — “O lord of Rakshasas, having been 
taken by Vibhishana for the purpose of being slain, we came 
to be seen by the righteous-souled Rama of immeasurable 
energy, and (finally) were liberated (by him). As these four 
persons have combined — like unto the Lokapalas, heroic, 
accomplished in arms, and of steady prowess — viz., 
Dagaratha’s son, Rama, the graceful Lakshmana, Vibhishana, 
and the highly powerful Sugriva, resembling the great Indra, 
these are capable of uprooting the city of Lanka — walls and 
gateways — and replacing her (on her former site), — leave 
thou the monkeys aside. Such is Rama’s figure and arms 
that he shall alone demolish Lanka, — leave the other three 
alone. And that host protected by R3ma, Lakshmana and 
Sugriva, shall become exceedingly hard to combat even by 
the Asuras and gods. — And the army of the high-souled 
rangers of the woods, eager for encounter, contains warriors 
bursting with high spirits. No use of dispute. Be thou intent 
on pacification. Do thou render back Maithili unto 
Dasaratha’s son.” 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YlDDHAKlNUAM \ 



1175 



SECTION XXVl. 



Hearing SSrana’s words, pregnant and truthful, king 
R§vana addressed him, saying, — “Even if the gods, 
Gandharvas and Danavas should attack me, Sita will 1 not 
part with from fear of all creatures. O amiable one, thou, 
having been hard handled by the monkeys and distressed in 
consequence, deemst it fit that Sita should be rendered back 
this very day. What foe of mine is there who is competent 
to conquer me in battle ?” Having uttered this rough speech, 
the graceful Rlvana — lord of the Rakhasas — desirous of 
surveying (the monkey-hosts), ascended an edifice white like 
snow, and elevated like many palms (placed one upon another). 
And transported with passion, Ravana in company with those 
spies, saw the sea, mountains and forests. And they beheld 
the Earth enveloped with monkeys, and the mighty host of 
monkeys, boundless and irresistible. And having seen this, 
king Ravana asked S§rana,— “Who among these monkeys 
are the foremost, who are the heroes, and who possessed of 
great strength ? Who, bursting with spirits, stay all about 
the fore ? Whom doth Sugriva listen to ? And who are 
the leaders of the monkey-leaders ? O Sarana, relate thou 
all this unto me. And what is the prowess of the monkeys ?” 
Thereat, S&rana, knowing the chiefs (of the monkey-army), 
spoke unto the sovereign of Rakshasas, who had asked (him), 
as to who were the heads of the rangers of the woods. “This 
monkey, that, setting up roars, stayeth in front of Lanka, 
surrounded by hundreds and thousands of monkey-leaders, 
by whose tremendous shouts Lanka trembleth with her wall, 
gateways, hills, woods and forests, and who is posted in front 
of the forces of the high-souled Sugriva — master of all the 
monkeys— is the heroic leader of monkey-bands named Nila. 
And that one, possessed of prowess, who, folding up his arms, 



Digitized by C-ooQle 




1176 



RkMlVANA. 



paceth the gound on foot, who, facing Lanka, from wrath is 
frequently yawning, who resembles a mountain-peak and is 
like the filaments of a lotus, who, enraged again and again, 
soundeth his tail, and the ten cardinal points resound with the 
sounds of whose tail,— is he who hath been sprinkled by 
Sugriva— king of monkeys — the heir apparent,named Angada. 
He challengeth thee to the fight. The worthy son of VSli 
and ever dear unto Sugriva, he putteth forth his prowess, 
as Varuna doth for Sakra. That that well-wisher of 
Raghava,the vehement Hanuman,bath seen Janaka’s daughter, 
was owing to the advice of this one. That powerful (hero) 
is proceeding, taking innumerable bands belonging to 
the lord of monkeys, for the purpose of beating thee by 
means of his soldiery. Following Vali's son, and surrounded 
by a mighty force, stayeth in the field the heroic Nala, 
the builder of the bridge. Those that with their limbs lying 
inactive, and setting up roars and ululations, are following 
this one,* are heroes dwelling in Chandana . T With his own 
army alone, the silver-hued Sweta of dreadful prowess hopes 
to subdue Lanka. Marshalling his monkey-forces and 

cheering up his soldiers, that intelligent monkey, famed over, 
the three regions, having speedily met with Sugriva, is 
retracing his steps. From days of yore on the banks of the 
Gomati there is a mountain, (named) Ramya, (otherwise) 
called Sanrochana. The mount abounds with various trees. 
There that leader of bands, named Kumuda, governs his 
kingdom. And he that cheerfully draweth after him 

hundreds and thousands of monkeys, and the long grim hairs 
of whose tail, coppery, yellow, sable and white, are cast 
about, is the energetic monkey, Chanda, eager for encounter. 
And he hopes to conquer Lanka by help of his own forces. 

* The reference is prospective. It means the monkey, Sweta, in the next 
sloka. — T. 

t This may mean some wood of sandals ; but the commentator is silent 
over it. — T. 



Digitized by C^ooQie 





fvddhakAndam . 



1177 



And this one, resembling a lion, tawny and furnished with a 
long mane, who, remaining apart, vieweth all Lank& as if con- 
suming her with his eyes, dwelleth for ever and a day in 
Vindhya, the mountain Krisha, Sahya, and the mount 
Sudar^ana, and, a leader of bands, is named Rambha. Three 
hundred Kotis of the foremost of monkeys, dreadful and 
fierce and possessed of terrific prowess, surrounding (him) 
go in his wake for the purpose of demolishing LankS. by 
their (native) might. And he that expandeth his ears and 
yawneth again and again, who defieth the fear of death and 
doth not move his forces, who trembleth for wrath and eyeth 
frequently askance, — and behold the lashing of his tail ! — and 
who setteth up leonine shouts, O king, with great energy 
and with fear cast off,— resideth in the romantic mount, 
Silweya, and, a leader of companies, is named Sarabha. To 
him, O king, belong forty hundred thousands of powerful 
leaders. And he that stayeth, like unto a mighty mass of 
clouds covering up the sky, in the midst of the monkey- 
heroes, as doth V&sava in the centre of the celestials, whose 
lofty shout is heard (mingled with) the uproar set up by the 
foremost monkeys, burning for battle, dwelleth in the excellent 
hill P&rij&tra ; and, ever irrepressible in fight, is named 
Panama, a leader of (monkey)-bands. Fifty lacs of leaders 
with their forces arranged, environ this commander of 
monkeys. He that stayeth gracing the dreadful array over- 
flowing with talk, stationed on the shore of the ocean,— 
resembling a second sea and like unto Durdara* — is the 
leader named Vitata. And he rangeth, drinking of (the 
waters of) the Ven§,— best among streams — and his forces 
are sixty lacs of monkeys. And the monkey, named Krathana, 
challengeth thee to conflict. He hath (under him) powerful 
and vigorous generals, and forces well divided. And the 
monkey owning that person of the hue of red chalk, and, 
who, elated with strength, disregardeth all the monkeys, — is 

* Name of a celebrated monkey- leader. — T. 

148 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1178: 



RIAIAYaNA. 



named Gavaya, who approacheth thee wrathfully. Seventy 
lacs (of troops) girt him round ; and by their means he hopes 
to bring down LankS. These are the heroes, incapable of 
being borne, whose numbers cannot be enumerated. These 
are the leaders and the heads thereof, as well as the forces 
set in order of battle.” 



SECTION XXVII. 



As thou lookest on, I shall describe unto thee those 
leaders who shall put forth their prowess for Raghava, and 
lay down their lives (in his behalf.) That one of dreadful 
deeds the long hairs on whose long tail, coppery, and yellow, 
and black, and white, thrown up, look like the rays of the 
Sun, and are trailing over the ground, is the monkey, named 
Hara ; whom follow hundreds and thousands (of monkeys) 
desperately upraising trees, intent upon (scaling) Lank&— the 
leaders of the monkey-king and his servants present (in this 
conflict.) And these whom thou beholdest present, resembling 
mighty masses of sable clouds, like unto black collyrium, 
of genuine prowess, countless and incapable of enumeration,— 
dwelling in mountains, provinces, and rivers,— terrible bears 
—approach thee, O king. In their amidst is their king, grim* 
eyed and of fierce appearance, like unto Parjanya* encom- 
passed by clouds, — who dwelleth in that best of mountains, 
Rikkhav£n, drinking of the Narmad§. — Behold this one 
resembling a hill— younger brother of Dhumra, lord of all 
the bears. He is equal to his brother in beauty, and of 
superior prowess. This leader of redoubtable leaders is 
named J§mbav&n. He is mild, obedient to his superiors and 

* Indra. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHARlNDAM. 



U79 



fierce in fight. The intelligent J5mbav£n assisted Sakra 
signally in the war of the gods and Asuras, and he hath won 
many boons (in consequence). Ascending the tops of 
mountains, these hurl down gigantic crags huge as colossal 
clouds, nor doth (the fear of) death (ever) disquiet them. 
And their bodies covered with hair, they resemble R&kshasas 
and ghosts (in their conduct). This one of immeasurable 
energy hath innumerable troops going about, who behold 
this leader of leaders under unusual excitement leaping 
and resting (by turns). This lord of monkeys dwelletli near 
the thousand-eyed Deity ; and this leader of bands, gifted 
with strength, is named Rambha. And he that going, 
toucheth with his side a mountain situated at the distance of 
a Yoyana, and, rising up, measureth the same length,— -and 
whose beauty is surpassed by none among quadrupeds,— is 
known under the name of Sannkdana, the grand-father of 
the monkeys ;— this intelligent one battled with Sakra,*— 
nor did he meet with discomfiture. This is that general 
of the forces. And he whose prowess is like that of Sakra, 
is this one begot by Fire on a Gandharva’s daughter, for 
assisting the celestials on the occasion of the war of the gods 
and the Asuras. And this graceful and powerful one — best of 
monkeys— disporteth in that sovereign of mountains 

inhabited by numbers of Kinnaras, where king Va^ravana 
eateth rose apples, and which, O lord of Rakshas, ever 
conduceth to the pleasure of thy brother. And this one who 
never extolleth himself in battle, is named Krathana — leader 
of hosts. Surrounded by a thousand Koti (of troops)* and 
stationed in the midst of the monkeys, he hopeth to subjugate 
Lanki with his own troops alone. And he that roameth 
about the Gang!, terrifying leaders of elephant-herds, 
remembering the former hostility of the monkeys and the 



* There is a word— rant, in battle — in this line, left out on the ground of. 
pleonasm.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




rAmIfa/va. 



n8o 

elephants, is this leader of bands, who, roaring, opposeth wild 
elephants in mountain-caverns and crushetb trees, —and 
foremost of monkeys, and chief of the monkey-forces— like 
Sakra himself in heaven, sporteth, resorting to U^iravija per- 
taining to Mandara, best of mountains, on the golden river.* 
A thousand lacs of monkeys, elated with vigor and prowess, 
setting up roars and furnished with (long) arms follow him ; 
and this one is the leader of those high-souled monkeys. 
And, O king, he whom thou seest resembling clouds uplifted 
by the winds, is a leader named Pramithi. And his fleet- 
coursing soldiery are fiery, and volumes of red-hued dust are 
scattered about him profusely on all sides. And these 
wondrous strong and dreadful Golangulasf numbering 
hundreds and hundred thousands, seeing the building of the 
bridge, surrounding, O mighty monarch, the leader named 
Gavaksha — a Golangula — set up shouts, intending to demolish 
Lanka with their prowess. Where the trees bring forth 
fruits of every season and the black bees resort, — in the 
mountain furnished with solar splendour, which the Sun 
circumambulates, by whose radiance ever beam beasts atid 
birds with a like hue, — whose table-lands are never forsaken 
by magnanimous Maharshis ; where the trees yield every 
object of desire and all are fraught with fruits ; in which best 
of mountains excellent honey is found,— there in the charm- 
ing Golden hill, O king, sporteth this one — the foremost of 
the principal monkeys, Ka9ari by name, a leader of bands. 
There are sixty thousand charming Golden hills. In their 
midst is that best of mountains , % even as thou, O sinless 
one, art among the Rakshas. There in the inmost hill dwell 
(monkeys) tawny-hued ; and white, — with coppery faces; 
yellowish like honey ; sharp-toothed; having nails for their 
weapons ; and four teeth like lions ; irresistible like tigers 

* Gan g&. — T. 

f Vide antt. 

| S&varni Meru. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




TVDDHAKlNDAM. 



1181 

all equal to VaiywSnara, and resembling flaming venomous 
snakes ; furnished with long tails ; like unto mad elephants ; 
seeming like gigantic hills ; roaring like mighty clouds ; 
with eyes tawny and round ; of terrific mein ; and emitting 
sounds,— and these are gazing at Lanka, as if devastating 
her, And this powerful one staying in their midst, is their 
leader, eager for victory ; and the puissant (monkey) always 
looketh like the Sun himself ; and this one, O king, is famed 
on earth by the name of Satavali. And this heroic one, 
powerful and mighty, established in his own prowess, hopeth 
to devastate Lank! with his own forces. And for compass- 
ing Rama’s desire, the monkey doth not cherish any kindness 
for his life. Gaya, Gavaksha, Nala, and the monkey Nila- 
each of these is encompassed by ten kotis of warriors. 
(Besides these), there are other choice monkeys dwelling in 
the Vindhya mountain, but I cannot enumerate these 
(monkeys) possessed of fleet vigor, in consequence of their 
vast number. All these, O mighty monarch, are of exceeding 
prowess, — all possess persons resembling mighty mountains ; 
and all are competent in a moment to remove mountains and 
scatter the Earth with them.” 



SECTION XXVIII. 



Having heard the words of Sarana, who had described 
the forces (of the monkeys), Suka, addressed Rivana, lord 
of Rakshasas, saying,— ‘‘Those, O king, whom thou seest 
stationed, resembling mad elephants, like unto nyagrodhas * 
belonging to the Ganga,— like unto Salas in the HimavSn,— 
are incapable of being borne, — they are possessed of 

* Banians. 



Digitized by 





rAmA van a. 



1182 

strength, and able to wear forms at will ; resembling deities 
and Danavas, and like the gods in conflict. These, numbering 
nine, five, and seven thousand kotis and thousand sankus 
and an hundred vrindas , are the ministers of Sugriva, 
residing in Kishkindha — monkeys begot by gods and 
Gandharvas, capable of assuming shapes at will. And those 
two whom thou beholdest, staying there, of equal proportions 
and endowed with god-like shapes, are Mainda and Dwivida, 
—who have no equals in fight. Permitted by Brahma, they 
had partaken of ambrosia. They hope to humble Lanka 
by their prowess. And he whom thou seest staying like a 
mad elephant, the monkey who, being enraged, can by his 
strength agitate the deep itself, who, searching for Vaidehi, 
had presented himself before thee, lord, — behold this monkey 
come again ! — whom thou hadst seen before !* — is the eldest 
son of Ka^ari, known as the offspring of the Wind-god— 
celebrated as Hanuman, who had bounded over the deep. 
Capable of wearing forms at pleasure, that first of monkeys 
is endeued with grace and strength,— and is of irresistible 
impetuosity even as that lord, the Wind. Seeing the Sun 
risen, (he) while a boy, resolving in his mind,— ‘Coursing a 
way measuring three thousand yoyanas y I will bring the Sun, 
— my hunger is not appeased and he sprang up, elated with 
strength. And, not getting that god, incapable of being sub- 
dued by the deities, saints and R&kshasas, he dropped down 
on the Ascending-hill. And thereat a jaw of that strong- 
jawed one was a little fractured on the rock, — and he is called 
Hanuman in consequence. I know this monkey and all his 
previous history. I cannot describe his strength, beauty 
or prowess. And this one alone hopes to lay Lanka low 
by his energy. And why dost thou today forget the monkey, 
who had flung flaming fire into Lanka ? And next to him 
is the hero of dark-blue hue, having eyes like lotuses, the 

* This dislocation occurs in the original. These descriptions generally 
are hardly amenable to a sound syntax.— T. 



Digitized by C^ooQie 




y UDDHA KlNDA Mi 



1183 

Atiratha among the Ikshwikus— of prowess celebrated in 
the world— -in whom virtue never wavereth and who never 
swerveth from righteousness ; who knoweth the Brahma 
Mantra and the Vedas, — the best of those versed in them— who 
pierceth the sky with his shafts and cleaveth the Earth, whose 
ire is like death, and whose prowess is like that of Sakra,— 
whose wife, Sit&, hath been carried away by thee from 
Janasth&na. And this is R£ma, who, O king, advanceth to 
encounter thee in conflict. And on his right side is one of 
the splendour of pure gold, broad -breasted, having dark 
curled hair— this one is named Lakshmana, ever mindful 
of his brother’s welfare. He is versed in polity as well as 
warfare— the foremost of those learned in all the branches 
of knowledge ; wrathful, invincible, victorious, powerful, 
conquering and strong,— the right arm of R£ma and his own 
life going about. * For Righava he careth not for his life. He 
hopeth to exterminate all the R&kshasas in battle. He that 
stayeth occupying the left side of R&ma, and surrounded by 
R&kshasas, is the king, Bibhishana, sprinkled as the king of 
Lank& by the auspicious king of kings, — he, filled with wrath, 
approacheth thee (for battle;. And he whom thou seest 
staying in the middle like a firm-based mountain, the lord 
of all monkeys, of inmeasurable prowess,— and who in energy 
fame, intelligence, strength, and lineage, is as superior to the 
monkeys as the mountain Himavan overtoppeth all the mount- 
ains, who in company with the principal monkey-leaders 
dwelleth in inaccessible Kishkindha, hard to penetrate, and 
dense with trees, and difficult of access, and denying approach 
on account of rocks ; and whose golden garland consisting of an 
hundred lotuses looks exceedingly elegant, which is the 
desire of men and gods, and where is established Lakshmi — (is 
Sugriva). And R£ma, having slain Vali, hath conferred this 
garland, Tart, and the eternal monkey-kingdom on Sugriva. 
An hundred of an hundred thousand is called a koti by 
the wise. An hundred of a thousand koti is called a Sanku. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




RlMkYAHA. 



1184 

An hundred of a thousand Sanku is known as a Mahl^anku. 
An hundred of a thousand MahSL^anku is here termed a 
Vrinda. An hundred of a thousand Vrinda is known as a 
Mah&vrinda. A thousand Mah£vrinda' is called here a 
Padma. An hundred of a thousand Padma is known as a 
Mahipadma. An hundred of a thousand Mah£padraa is 
termed a Kharva. An hundred of a thousand Kharva 
is termed a Samudra. An hundred of a thousand Saiuudra is 
known as a Mahaugha. Thus backed by a thousand koti,zn& an 
hundred Sanku, and a thousand Maha^anku, and an hundred 
Vrinda, and a thousand MahSi vrinda, and an hundred Padma, and 
a thousand Mah£padma and an hundred kharva , and an equal 
Samaudra and an equal Mahaugha, — by kotis of Mahaughas — 
resembling the sea, — and surrounded by the heroic Bibhishana 
as well as his counsellors,— that Lord of monkeys,al ways engirt 
by a mighty force, and possessed of exceeding strength and 
prowess, will encounter thee in battle. Observing this host, 
that hath presented itself, resembling a flaming planet, 
do thou, O mighty monarch, prepare thyself to the uttermost, 
— so that victory may be thine, and that thou mayst not come 
by discomfiture at the hands of the foe/’ 



SECTION xxix. 



Seeing the leaders of monkeys as pointed out by Suka,— 
the exceedingly puissant Lakshmana — Rama’s right arm— and 
his* brother Bibhishana staying near R&ma, and Sugriva of 
dreadful prowess — sovereign of all the monkeys,— and the 
strong Angada, grandson unto the thunder-handed one,t 

* i. e. R&vana’s 
t Indra. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHA KlNDA M. 1185 

and the powerful Hanuman ; and the unconquerable Jamba van ; 
and Sushena ; and Nila; aud Nala — best oj monkeys, — 
and Gaya; and Gavaksha ; and Sarabha ; and Mainda ; and 
Dwivida r — Ravana, with his heart agitated a little, and his 
wrath aroused, — when their talk had ended, rebuked those 
heroes, Suka and Sarana. And he wrathfully spoke unto 
them, standing in humble guise with their heads hung down, 
harsh words faltering with passion,- — “That counsellors 
subsisting (on the wealth of their master and sovereign), 
should say aught disagreeable to him, whether they meet with 
,his favor or disfavor — is not meet. Without being questioned, 
it is (proper) for you both to hymn the praises of a foe that is 
opposed and that hath advanced for encounter ! Ye have in vain 
worshipped your preceptors, aged people, and spiritual guides, 
for ye have failed to appropriate the cream of Political 
Science, which should be availed of. Or if ye had appropriated 
the same, you have forgotten it afterwards ; and ye bear the 
burden of ignorance. And it is owing to my good fortune 
that, having such stupid counsellors, I have as yet held my 
kingdom. Have ye no fear of death that ye use harsh speech 
towards me, who am the ruler and whose tongue dispenseth 
good and evil ? Even trees may exist in the forest, coming 
in contact with burning fire ; but transgressors cannot 
exist, visited with the chastisement of the monarch. I shall 
slay these wicked wights, who praise the side of the enemy, 
if my anger be not moderated, remembering their former 
good offices. Avaunt ! Go hence from near me ! I do not 
wish to slay you, remembering your good acts. Slain ye 
(already) are, who are ingrate and cherish no affection 
for me.” Thus accosted, Suka and S5rana, seeing (how 
things stood), covered with bashfulness, went out, saluting 
RSvana by uttering ‘Victory !* Then that ranger of night, 
the Ten-necked one, said unto Mahodara, who was present, 
to summon some spies. Thus accosted, Mahodara speedily 
ordered some spies (to present themselves). Thereat, the 

148 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1 1 86 



RkMlYANA . 



spies,hurriedly arriving there at the mandate of the monarch, 
and, presenting themselves, stood with joined hands, uttering 
blessings of victory. Then the lord of RSLkshasas, R&vana, 
addressed the spies, who were heroic, faithful, calm, and 
courageous,— “Go hence, and acquaint yourselves with the 
exertions of R&ma ; as well as with those who, being the 
custodians of R&ma’s closest counsels, have gladly joined him 
(here). How he sleepeth and how he waketh, and what he 
engageth himself in, — having deftly acquainted yourselves 
with all this thoroughly, do you come (back here). The wise 
king that gathers (a knowledge of) his enemy through spies, 
can, putting forth a modicum of effort in conflict, neutralise 
(his exertions). ,, Thereat the spies, saying,— “So it is”, 
taking Sardula to the fore, with delighted hearts went round 
the sovereign of the R&kshasas. And, having gone round 
the high-souled R&kshasa-chief, the spies set out for where 
RSLma with Lakshmana was. And repairing secretly to the 
vicinity of the mountain bordering on the fair shore,* they 
saw Rama and Lakshmana with Sugriva and Bibhishana. 
And seeing that host, they were overwhelmed with fear. 
And, while staying there, they, discovered by the righteous 
lord of RSkshasas, Bibhisana, were sore harassed (by the 
monkeys). And that wicked RSkshasa, Sardula, alone was 
taken (before Rama). But R§ma liberated him, who was 
assailed by the monkeys. And R£ma also, entertaining no 
enmity against them, also liberated the others, (who 
accompanied S&rdula). And, on having been put to straits 
by the powerful monkeys of fleet vigor, they,f breathing 
hard, and with their consciousness lost, again arrived at 
Lanka. Then those exceedingly strong spies, always ranging 
outside, presenting themselves before the Ten-necked one, 
informed him of the forces of R5ma, stationed near mount 
Suvela. 

* Suvelasya Sailasya — may also mean, of the mount Suvela. — T. 

t The spies, that is. — T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




y b UDHA KK n da m . 



1 187 



SECTION xxx. 



Then the spies communicated unto Lanka's lord news 
concerning RSghava and his host stationed at the mount 
Suvela. Hearing the words of the spies, that Rama, 
accompanied by a mighty army, had arrived (there), Ravana 
was a little agitated and spoke unto Sardula, — “Thy color 
hath changed its natural aspect, and, O ranger of the night, 
thou lookest poorly. Didst not come under the control of 
the wrathful foes ?” Thus ordered by him, then (Sardula), 
bewildered by fear, addressed that tiger of a R&kshasa, 
saying,— “Those powerful monkeys, O king, puissant, strong, 
and protected by Raghava, are incapable of being ranged 
(by us). And they cannot be conversed with or interrogated. 
All around, the courses are kept by monkeys resembling hills. 
As soon as I entered, and was scanning that host, 1 was 
discovered. And forcibly taken by the Rakshas, I was 
pulled by them hither and thither. And furiously assailed by 
the monkeys with thighs, clenched fists, teeth, and palms, I 
was dragged in the midst of the army by the enraged 
monkeys. And, after having been taken all about, I was (at 
length) taken before Rama, bleeding, with my limbs showing 
sorry work, and my senses swimming and paralysed. And, 
having been belabored by the monkeys, I, on craving his kind- 
ness with joined hands, was, at his pleasure, rescued by 
RSghava, with, “Don't, don't"! Having filled up the deep with 
rocks and crags, Rama equipped with weapons, stayeth, 
occupying the gate of Lankl. And, letting me off, that one 
of suspassing vigor, surrounded by monkeys, and, arranging 
his forces in the Garura fashion, advanceth upon LankSL. And 
he draweth nigh to the wall. Therefore, do one of these 
things in preference to the other, — either render back Sita, 
or give him battle.'* Hearing this, Ravana, lord of Rakshasas, 



Digitized by v^ooQfe 




1 1 88 



Ra/u At An a. 



then reflecting in his mind, spoke unto Sardula these 
pregnant words, — “Even if the gods, Gandharvas, and DStnavas 
should array themselves against me, Sita I shall not give, from 
fear of all creatures. ,, Having said this, that exceedingly 
energetic one again said, — “Thou hast ranged this army. 
Who here among the monkeys are heroic ? And, O 
amiable one, what is their potency ? And what are those 
monkeys that are hard to approach, like ? And, O thou 
of fair vows, whose sons and grandsons are they ? Truly 
relate all this (to me). Having ascertained their strength 
and weakness, I shall in this matter adopt my course. Those 
who wish for fight, certainly take account of all this/’ Thus 
addressed by Ravana, Sardula — best of spies — thus began 
to speak in the presence of Ravana, — “O king, that uncon- 
querable one in fight, Jambavan, is well known as the son 
Gadgada, king of bears. The other son of Gadgada is the 
son of Sakra’s preceptor. By which son, single-handed, was 
done immense oppression to the Rakshas. And the righteous 
and puissant Sushena is the son of Dliarma.* And the mild 
monkey, Dadhimukha, O king, is the son of Soma.f And 
Sumukha.Durmukha and the monkey, Vegadargin (resembling) 
Death himself, were for certain begot by the Self-create in 
the shape of a monkey. { And Nila himself is the son of the 
bearer of sacrificial oblations ;§ and Hanuman is famed as 
the son of the Wind-god. And the irrepressible and youthful 
Angada is the grandson of Sakra. And the lusty Mainda 
and Dwivida are sprung from Agvvi. And five are the 
sons of Vaivaswata, resembling the Reaper himself — Gaya, 
Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha and Gandhamidana. But I can 
not enumerate the rest, ten kotis of heroic monkeys — all 

* Righteousness. 

t Moon. ‘ 

t Another meaning is, — “ The monkey , Vegadargi — who is Death himself in 
the shape of a monkey But I give the more acceptable sense. — T. 

$ Fire. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHA KANDA M . 



i i8g 

sons of deities — burning for battle. And this is Dagaratha’s 
son — this youth resembling a lion, who slew Dushana and 
Khara and Triciras. There breathes none on Earth that is 
like unto Kama in prowess, by whom was slain VirSdha and 
Kavandha, resembling the Destroyer. No person can on 
earth describe the virtues of Rama ; by whom have been 
slain all those RSkshasas that had gone to Janasth£na. And 
here also is the virtuous Lakshmana, like unto the foremost 
of elephants, coming in the way of whose shafts, even V§sava 
doth not live. And here are Sweta and Jyotirmukha, 
s prung from Vaskara's self ; and the monkey Hemakuta is 
the son of Varuna. And the heroic Nala — best of monkeys, 
is the son of Vigwakarma. And powerful and impetuous, 
Durdhara is the son of Vasu. And that foremost of R&kshasas, 
Bibhishana, thy brother, engaged in the welfare of R5ghava, 
hath laid seige to Lanka. Thus have I described unto thee 
the entire monkey host stationed in mount Suvela. As for 
what remnineth to be done, thou art the master.” 



SECTION XXXI. 
i a — 

Then the spies of the king informed him of the forces 
of Raghava, incapable of being agitated, which had stationed 
themselves on mount Suvela. Hearing the arrival of Rama’s 
mighty army from the spies, Ravana was a little agitated, 
and lie spoke unto the ministers, — “Let the ministers speedily 
present themselves, having their wits about them, — the 
time forsooth hath come for counsel. ,, Hearing his mandate, 
those RSkshasas, his counselors, swiftly presented them- 
selves. And then he consulted with his R&kshasa counselors. 
Having deliberated duly, that resistless one, dismissing 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




KAmA i'aiVa. 



1190 

his ministers, entered his own abode. Then, taking with him 
the highly strong Vidyujjibha, huge-bodied and gifted with the 
powers of illusion, he entered where Mithila’s daughter was. 
And the lord of R&kshasas said unto Vidyujjibha, skilled in 
illusion, — “Do thou bring Janaka’s daughter under the sway 
of illusion. And, O ranger of the night, do thou, taking an 
illusory head of R&ghava, as well as a mighty bow with 
the shaft (set), present thyself before me.” Thus accosted, 
the night-ranger, Vidyujjibha, saying, “So be it,” displayed 
that desired illusion unto R&vana. Thereat, the king, eager 
to meet with Site in the A9oka woods, well-pleased, 
conferred an excellent ornament on him. Then the exceed- 
ingly powerful lord of the Nairitas, the younger brother of 
the Dispenser of riches, entered (into that place) and saw 
(there Site) distressed, albeit unworthy of distress, — with her 
head hung down, overwhelmed with woe, — sitting on the 
ground, staying at the agoka woods, engaged in the contem- 
plation of her lord, conciliated by dreadful Rikshasis 
remaining near. Then, drawing near Sita,R&vana, proclaiming 
his exultation, said these haughty words unto the daughter 
of Janaka, — “O gentle one, he depending on whom thou^ 
being soothed by (me), slightest me — that slayer of Khara, 
thy husband, RSghava, hath fallen in battle. Thy roots 
have been competely severed, and thy pride hath been 
destroyed by me. In consequence of this calamity, O Site, 
thou slialt become my wife. O foolish (girl), renounce this 
idea. What wilt thou do with him that is dead ? O meek 
(wench), be thou the mistress of all my wives. O thou of 
slender religious merit ! O thou whose object hath been 
defeated ! O thou that presumest to be wise ! Hearken 
unto the destruction of thy lord, like the dreadful destruction 
of Vritra ! Surrounded by a vast army gathered by the 
sovereign of the monkeys, Raghava had presented himself 
on the shore of the sea, for compassing my destruction. And 
on the sun having set, R&ma stationed himself with his 



Digitized by 




I’UDDHA KlNDA M. 



I I 91 



mighty army, oppressing the northern shore (of the sea). 
Then at midnight (my) spies coming to that host, thus 
stationed, fatigued from travel, and sleeping soundly (in 
consequence), — first ranged it. Then my mighty forces led 
by Prahasta slew his host overnight, where was present 
Rama along with Lakshmana. And repeatedly upraising 
pattigas and bludgeons, swords, rods and other mighty 
weapons ; and (discharging) showers of arrows, and darts, 
and daggers and maces and sticks and crows and bearded 
darts and discuses and clubs ; — the R&kshasas discharged 
these among the monkeys. And while R§ma was sleeping, 
the furious Prahasta by means of a mighty falchion, with 
speed cut off his head clean. Bibhishana, who was flying 
at his will, was taken captive. And Lakshmana along with the 
monkey-army hath departed somewhere. And, O Sita, 
Sugriva — lord of monkeys — hath his neck broken ; and, O 
Sita, with his jaw fractured, Hanuman hath been slaughtered 
by the RSkshasas. — And Jambavan, endeavouring to spring 
up with his thighs, was slain in the conflict ; being severed 
by bearded darts, even as a tree cut off. And the stalwart 
Mainda and Dwivida— those foremost of monkeys — sighing 
and lamenting, bathed in blood, — destroyers of foes — were 
cut off with a sword. And Pana9a is rolling on the earth like 
a (veritable) Pana9a.* And mangled by many iron arrows, 
Darimukha lieth in a cave. And the exceedingly energetic 
Kumuda, dumb, is slain by shafts. And torn by innumerable 
(arrows) discharged on all sides by Rikshasas, Angada, 
vomitting blood, lieth on the ground.f And the monkeys, 
hard pressed by elephants, and others by networks of cars, 
lie low in the field, having been agitated like clouds by winds. 
And others afflicted with affright, flee, attacked (by the enemy) 
in the rear, and followed by the RSkshasas, like mighty 
elephants pursued by lions. And some have fallen into the 

* The tree of thatJiame. — T. 

f This sloka has 'Angada' twice. One, of course, is left out. — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 




1192 



rXaiXya na> 



sea, and some have taken refuge in the sky ; and the bears 
have mounted up trees along with the monkeys. And on the 
shore of the sea, and in mountains and woods many are the 
tavvny-hued monkeys that have been slain by RSkshasas of 
frightful forms. Thus hath thy lord been slain by*my forces, 
along with his army ; and I have his head, washed in blood 
and besmeared with dust.” Thereat, the exceedingly 
irrepressible lord of Rakshasas, Ravana, spake unto a 
Rakshasi, in the hearing of Sita, — “Bring (hither) the 
Rakshasa, Vidyujjibha of cruel deeds, who hath personally 
brought Raghava’s head from the field.” Thereat, Vidyujjibha, 
taking the head along with the bow, bowing down the head 
(unto Ravana), stood before him. Then spake king Ravana 
unto the Rakshasa, Vidyujjibha of the long tongue, who was 
staying by, — “Do thou at once hold before Sita the head of 
Da9aratha*s son. Let her clearly behold the ultimate sad 
plight of her lord.” Thus addressed, that Raksha, throwing 
that graceful head before Sita, swiftly vanished. And 
Ravana cast down the mighty blazing bow', famed through 
the three worlds, saying, — “This is Rama’s. This is the 
bow of thy Rama with the string fixed. Slaying that man 
over night, Prahasta brought it hither.” 



SECTION XXXII. 



SEEING that head and that excellent bow, and (remember- 
ing) the union of (Rama) and Sugriva related by Hanuman,— 
and (seeing) those eyes, and the complexion of that face, and 
that countenance like unto that of her lord,— and that hair 
and that forehead; and that beautiful jewel forming the 
crest ; and recognizing (Rama) by all these tokens combined,— 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKlNDAM . 



1 *93 

(Sit&), exceedingly aggrieved, rebuked Kaikeyi, lamenting 
like a female osprey, — “O Kaikeyi, have thy wishes attained. 
Slain hath been the son of the race ; and the entire race is 
exterminated by thee, partial to dissension. And what evil 
had been* done unto Kaikeyi by the revered R§ma, that 
along with me, he hadst been banished into the woods, with 
rags given him (for his covering) Having said this, 
Vaidehi, forlorn and trembling (all over), dropped to the 
earth, like a plantain cut off. Then, recovering after a while, 
and having regained her consciousness, the large-eyed one, 
placing the head in her front, gave way to grief. “Ah ! I am 
undone, O mighty-armed one ! O thou that didst follow stern 
vows ! From thy (death), I have come by this final plight, 
having been rendered a widow. The greatest calamity (that 
can befall a woman), is said to be the death of her husband. 
And, possessor of an excellent character, thou hast departed 
before me, who have ever trod the path of the righteous ; but 
who have come by a mighty grief and am plunged in a sea of 
sorrow. And thou, who was engaged in delivering me, 
hast thyself fallen ! And my mother-in-law, Kau9aly§ ; 
attached (to thee), through the death of thee, her son, at the 
hands of Rakshasas, hath been reduced to the condition of a 
cow that hath been deprived of her calf. O RSghava, even 
the astrologers had predicted long life for thee. But their 
words are false, — thou, O Raghava, wast short-lived. Or 
didst thy wisdom, wise and good as thou wert, come to 
naughty For God, who is the origin of all beings, maketh 
(every one) reap the fruit of his own acts. And why, versed 
in polity as thou wast, didst thou come by death, unforeseen f 
Thou wast acquainted with the means of warding off mis* 
fortune, and skilled in doing so. And having been brought 
hither by me representing the Fatal Night, fierce and fell, — 
after (being) embraced, and by force, — the lotus-eyed one hath 
met with his death. Here liest thou, O long-armed one, leav- 
ing me lone, — and embracing the Earth like thy beloved fair. 

150 



Digitized by t^ooQie 



1194 



RlMlTANA. 



Ever carefully worshipped with perfumed wreaths, this bow 
of thine, O hero, embellished with gold, is dear unto me. O 
sinless one, thou hast surely gone to heaven, and (art there) 
in the company of thy sire and my father-in-law, Da9aratha, 
and all thy ancestors. Thou hast become a star of the 
firmament as the fruit of thy great act.* Thou hast dis- 
regarded thy righteous race of Rajarshis. O king, why dost 
thou not look at me ? And why is it that thou dost not 
answer me, who am a girl, hardly arrived at youth, — and who 
am thy wife and companion ? That thou at the time of thy 
espousing my hand hadst vowed — I will practise (righteous- 
ness) with thee — do thou, O Kakutstha, recollect the same, 
and take me, who am overwhelmed with distress. Why, O 
best of goers, hast thou gone from this world to that other, 
leaving behind me, overwhelmed with distress ? That 
person of thine which, decked out with auspicious things, I 
used to embrace, beasts of prey will for certain tear the 
same. Having performed the Agnishtoma and other sacrifices 
with Dakshinas (dispensed), — why hadst not thou attained 
purity by means of the sacrificial fire? Kaufalya, over- 
whelmed with sorrow, shall only behold one of the three that 
had gone away to distant lands, — come (back) — Lakshmana. 
And, on being asked by her, he shall relate thine as well as the 
deaths of thy friend's troops over night at the hands of the 
Rakshasas. And, O RSghava, hearing thee slain while asleep, 
and me staying in the abode of the Raksha,she with her heart 
cleft (in twain), shall cease to exist. And for the sake of me, 
abject that I am, that sinless son of the king, Rama, possessed 
of prowess, having crossed the ocean, hath been slain in the 
footprint of a cow. I, the befouler of my line,, who had been 
wedded by Da^aratha’s son through want of discretion, 
becoming the wife of the revered Rama, was (in reality) his 
Death. Without doubt, in another birth I had abstained 
from choice gifts,— and therefore it is that I sorrow to-day, 

* The carrying out the command of thy sire.—T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YVDDHAKlNDAM . 



”95 



albeit being the wife of one that was (ever dear) unto guests. 
Do thou, O Ravana, speedily slay me upon Rama; and, 
bringing the wife to the husband, compass my best benefit. 
Do thou join my head to his and my body to his body, 

I will, O Ravana, follow the way of my high-souled lord.” 
Tlius, burning in grief, did that large-eyed one indulge in 
lamentations ; and Janaka’s daughter kept fast gazing at the 
head and bow of her lord. And as the Rakshasa was by 
while Siti. was 'thus bewailing, there appeared before his 
lord, with joined hands, the warder, saying, — “May the 
worshipful one be victorious !” And saluting and propitiat- 
ing him, (Ravana), he told him that Prahasta, general 
of the forces, had arrived. “Prahasta hath come to thee,, 
surrounded by all the courtiers. And, O lord, I was des- 
patched by him, desirous of seeing thee. O mighty monarch, 
surely there is — and thou art forgiving from thy regal 
sentiment* — some work which is momentous ; and do 
thou see them.” Hearing these words of the Rakshasa, 
the Ten-necked one, leaving the agoka wood, went to see the 
counselors. And, having decided his entire course of action 
in consultation with his competent advisers, (Ravana), 
entering his court, — well knowing R&ma’s prowess, set about 
his work. And as soon as Ravana left that place, that head 
and that bow vanished. And in company with the councilors 
of dreadful power, (Ravana) decided his course with reference 
to Rama. And then the lord of R&kshasas, Ravana, 
resembling the day of doom, addressed his gerierals, — all 
well-wishers — staying hard by, saying, — “Do ye speedily 
summon my forces with the beat of drums — nor do ye 
give out the reason (of the summons).” Then assenting 
to his speech with “So be it,” the envoys immediately sum- 
moned that mighty force ; and, when it had arrived, they 
informed their master, eager for conflict, of its arrival. 

* This dislocated period insinuates that RAvana, possessed of royal 
nature, should forgive this untimely intrusion. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQle 





RAMA KAN A. 



1196 



SECTION XXXIII. 



Seeing SitS overwhelmed with grief, a RSkshasi, named 
SaramSt, who was the beloved companion (of SitSl), drew near 
to his dear ^friend), Vaidehi. And the mild-speeched- Sarama 
comforted the exceedingly distressed SitS, who had been 
bereft of her senses by the lord of R2kshasas. SitS, who was 
protected there (by SaramS), had been made a friend by her. 
And, protecting her at the command of RSvana, that kind- 
hearted companion, firm in vows, saw SitS, deprived of her 
consciousness. And she* comforted with a friend’s affection 
that one of fair vows, who was rolling in the dust and rising 
up from it like a mare.f “Having come to the solitary wood 
for protecting thee, I, renouncing all fear of RSvana, have, 
remaining hid, heard everything that he addressed unto thee, 
as well as what thou hadst replied unto him. For thee, O thou 
of expansive eyes, I have no fear of Ravapa. And, O 
Maithili, I, coming out, have also learnt well as to why the 
lord of R&kshasas hath gone out hence hurriedly. Rama, 
acquainted with self, is incapable of being surprised in 
sleep $ nor doth the slaying of that tiger-like one commend 
itself to me as probable. And the monkeys fighting with 
trees, well protected by Raghava, like the gods protected by 
the foremost of the celestials, are incapable of being slain. 
And, possessed of arms long and rounded ; graceful ; broad- 
breasted $ powerful ; accoutred with the bow ; and mailed ; 
righteous ; and famous over the earth ; endowed with 
energy; and along with his brother, Lakshmana, ever 
protecting himself and others ; of noble descent ; and 

* SaramcL.— T. 

t The commentator intelligently remarks : /Is a mare does , to remove 
fatigue. — 7\ 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




yvddhakXndam. 



1197 



versed in polity ; the destroyer of the hostile ranks ; 
and of inconceivable strength and manhood, — the graceful 
Raghava, O Sita, slayer of foes, is not slain. This illusion 
hath been spread around thee by that fierce, illusion-creating 
one, whose mind ever runs upon improper acts and who 
opposeth himself to all creatures. — All thy sorrow hath 
departed, and thy good day hath dawned. Certainly 
Lakshmi seeketh thee. And, O lady, hearken unto what is 
dear to thee ! Having crossed over the ocean, along with 
the monkey-host, R§ma hath encamped himself on the 
southern shore of the sea. By me hath been seen the 
complete Kakutstha along with Lakshmana, accompanied by 
the forces, stationed on the marge of the main, — protected 
(by his native might). Those R&kshasas of fleet vigor who 
had been despatched by this one, have brought the news 
that Raghava hath crossed. — And, O large-eyed lady, having 
learnt this news, Ravana — lord of RSkshasas — is consulting 
with all his counselors.” As the RSkshasi, Sarama, was 
relating this unto SitS, she heard the leonine roars of the 
army, emitted with the greatest energy. And, hearing the 
mighty sounds of kettledrums produced by sticks struck 
(thereon), the honey-tongued Sarama spoke thus unto Sita, — 
"These dreadful sounds of the kettledrum, O mother, call 
to arms. And hark to the solemn notes of the kettledrums, 
resembling the rumbling of clouds \ The mad elephants are 
caparisoned and the car-horses are yoked ; and thousands (of 
warriors) are seen, mounted on steeds, with bearded darts in 
their hands. And, as waters fill up the ocean, mailed 
warriors of wonderful forms, vehement and roaring, by 
thousands rush out on all sides and fill the highways. And 
mark the splendour ^spread around by the polished arms 
and bucklers and mail, — and by the cars, horses and 
elephants of the followers of the Rakshasa-chief, — consisting 
of many hues shooting up, — like unto the appearance of a 
fire in summer, burning a forest, — and also mark the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




RlMlFANA. 



tt 98 

excitement of the high-spirited and fast-coursing Rakshas !* 
And hear the sounds of bells and the rattling of the 
car-wheels ! And hear the neighing of the steeds and the 
reports of the drums. And fierce is the excitement of these 
R&kshasas — followers of the Raksha-chief, — with their hands 
bearing upraised arms, — capable of making people’s hair 
stand on end. The sorrow removing Sree espouseth thee $ 
and the fear of the Rakshas is come. And as Vasava did unto 
the Daityas, the lotus-eyed Rama, thy lord — of controlled 
anger, and of inconceivable prowess, slaying RSvana in battle 
and thus delivering thee, shall approach thee. And, as 
Vasava put forth his prowess among his foes, in company 
with the foe-destroying Vishnu, thy lord, along with 
Lakshmana, shall display his prowess among the Rakshas. 
On the enemy having fallen, I shall behold thee, devoted to 
thy lord, with thy desire attained, soon lying on the lap of 
Rama. And, O J&naki, embracing (thy lord), thou shalt shed 
tears of joy on his mighty breast And, O Sita, soon shall 
the highly powerful Rama loosen this braid of thine reaching 
unto thy hips, which thou hast been wearing for many a 
month. And, O exalted one, seeing his face like the full 
moon risen, thou shalt shed water begot of ruth, even as a 
she-serpent casts off her slough. And, O Mithila’s daughter, 
speedily slaying Ravana in battle, that one worthy of 
happiness shall reap felicity in the company of th^e, his 
beloved. And, loved by the high-Souled Rama, thou shalt 
be happy, even as the Earth furnished with crops brought 
forth by plenteous showers. Do thou, O exalted one, take 
refuge with him, who, going round the foremost of mountains, 
speedily assumeth a steed-like circular movement $ for even 
the maker of day is the source of people’s joy and grief. ,, 

* This line of verse defies all attempts to make it fall into syntactical order 
with the rest of the sentence. It is a hideous hiatus in the passage. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKlNDAM 



1199 



SECTION xxxiv. 



IBuRNING with grief on account of those words * Sarama 
gladdened and cheered her, even as masses of, clouds 
(cheer up) the burning Earth. And then, desirous of doing 
her good, (Sita's) friend, conversant with season, and ever 
preluding her speech with a smile, spoke unto her season- 
ably, — “O thou having dark eyes, I can, secretly going to 
Rama and communicating to him thy auspicious words, come 
back clandestinely. Nor, when I course the supportless sky, 
can even the Wind or Garura follow me.” As she said 
this, Sita with her grief a little lightened, said unto Sarama 
in sweet and smooth words, — “Thou art capable of even 
going to the nethermost regions. But do thou on my behalf 
that which is fit to be done by thee. If thou intend 
doing me a good turn, and if thy sense be steady, I would 
know what Ravana is doing after having left this place. That 
guileful and wicked-minded one, R&vana, destroyer of 
enemies, having powers of illusion, overwhelms me 6ven as 
the Varuni just drunk. Confining me here for ever and a 
day, (Ravana) sets on dreadful Rakshasas to alike threaten 
and scold me constantly. And I am agitated aud alarmed, 
and my mind is (always) uneasy. And I, dwelling in the agoka 
wood, is ever agitated/ If there is any talk (of delivering 
mej, or keeping me confined,— -thou shouldst communicate 
unto me the decision arrived at. This is the highest favor 
that I seek (at thy hands). ,, Thereat, the mild-speeched 
Sarama, wiping (Site’s) face washed in tears, spake unto her, 
as she said this, — “If this is thy wish, I will go, O Janaki. O 
Mithila’s daughter, having possessed myself of the intent 
of the enemy, I shall come back.” Having said this, (Sarama), 

* i.e. the words of R&vana. 



Digitized by 




iioo 



A \AMAYaNA. 



repairing to the Raksha, heard R3.vana's converse with his 
counselors. And having heard of the decision of that 
wicked-minded one, she, understanding decisions, swiftly 
retraced her steps to the fair agoka forest. And then, entering 
there, she saw Janaka’s daughter, expecting (her) like a 
very Sri, bereft of her lotus. And, the fair-spoken Saram3, 
on getting back (near her), SitS, embracing her affectionately, 
herself gave her a seat. “Sitting down here at ease, do 
thou relate to me faithfully all about the determination of the 
wicked-minded and guileful Ravana.” Thus accosted by the 
trembling SitS, Sarama related everything that had been 
said by Ravana and his counselors. “O Vaidehi, the Raksha 
lord was advised by his mother and the aged counselors in 
pregnant words informed with affection, having thy deliver- 
ance for their object. ‘Do thou make over Maithili unto the 
king of men, paying him homage due. Thou hast in 
Janasthana profusely witnessed wonderful instances (of his 
prowess). The crossing of the ocean, Hanum&n's sight (of 
Sita', — and the slaughter of the Rakshas in fight, — what 
person is capable of doing all this in battle ?’ Thus long 
exhorted by his counselors as well as his mother, Ravana 
doth not make up his mind to emancipate thee, even as a 
covetuous person is loath to part with wealth (appropriated’. 
And, O Maithili, without renouncing his life in battle, he 
doth not intend to liberate thee. Even this is the dermina- 
tion which that cruel one hath arrived at along with his 
advisers. This intent is in consequence of their coveting sur- 
cease. He can not yield thee up from sheer fear ; nor is he 
backward in battle, or shirketh his own destruction or that 
of all the Rakshasas. O dark-eyed lady, slaying R£vana 
in battle with sharp shafts, Rama shall take the back to 
Ayodhya.” In the meanwhile there was heard a mighty 
uproar occasioned by the whole host, and drums and conchs, 
— which shook the earth. Hearing that hubbub of the 
monkey-army, the servants of the Rltkshasa monarch, ran 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




t’UDDHAKkNDAM. 



1201 



who were in Lanka, — growing dispirited, and bereft of energy, 
with weakness overcoming their powers, — did not see any 
good, in consequeuce of the fault of the ruler. 



SECTION XXXV. 

- — tic — 

A.ND that captor of hostile capitals, the mighty-armed 
R&ma, was advancing (upon Lanka) with the sounds of drums 
mixed with the blares of conchs. Hearing this noise, Ravana 
— lord of R&kshasas — reflecting for a while, cast his eyes 
upon his counselors. And addressing there all those 
counsellors, that afflictor of the world — the crooked and 
highly powerful lord of the R&kshasas, Ravana, making his 
court resound, — running down (Rama’s) crossing the main, 
as well as his vigor, strength and manhood, — said to them,— 
“What ye have said touching Rama’s (prowess), hath been 
heard by me. And I also know ye to be of sterling valor in the 
field. Yet why, knowing Rama’s prowess, do ye silently look 
at each other ?” Then the maternal grand sire (of Ravana), 
possessed of exceeding wisdom, named Maiyavan, hearing his 
words, said,— “The king that is accomplished in the various 
kinds of learning,* and that followeth polity, ever commandeth 
affluence and bringeth his enemies under his subjection. He 
that seasonably concludes peace and carries on war with his 
enemies,— and who advances his own party, attaineth great 
affluence. A king should enter into peace, if he be an 
equal or inferior of his adversary, and engage in war, if be 
more powerful,— but an enemy should never be disregarded. 

* The commentator says there are four and ten kinds of learning ; but 
unfortunately he does not enumerate them.— T. 

I 5 I 



Digitized by 





1202 



RkMkrANA. 



Therefore, 0 R&vana, peace with R5ma is what commends 
itself to me ; and do thou render unto him that for which thou 
hast been invaded (by him), viz., Sita. All the Devarshis 
and Gandharvas wish for (R&ma’s) victory. Therefore, do 
not enter into hostilities with him ; but do thou bend thy 
mind to the conclusion of peace with him. That possessor 
of the six attributes, the Great-father, hath appointed two 
courses, (respectively) for the Asuras and the celestials, 
having for their proper objects righteousness and unrighteous- 
ness. Righteousness, we hear, is the course of the high-souled 
celestials, as, O R&kshasa, unrighteousness is that of Rakshas 
and Asuras. During the Krita Yuga, righteousness swalloweth 
X up sin ; and during Tishya,* unrighteousness swalloweth up 
x virtue. Thou, ranging the three worlds, hadst extinguished 
pregnant piety, and reaped unrighteousness ; and it is for this 
that thy foes have waxed potent.f And, having grown 
through thy neglect, unrighteousness devoureth us, and that 
protector of the gods, (righteousness), is strengthening the 
side of the celestials. Thou, addicted to carnal pleasures 
and acting in defiance of duty, hadst aroused the high wrath 
of the saints resembling fire. The power of these possessed 
of souls sanctified through asceticism, and ever engaged in 
' invoking the aid of righteousness, is incapable of being 
resisted arrd is like flaming fire. The twice-born ones engage 
in contemplation with intent minds, offer oblations into the 
fire according to the ordinance, and loudly recite the Vedas. 
They overpower the Rakshas, uttering the Vedas ; and thereat 
they fly in all directions like clouds scattered in summer. And 
the smoke that ariseth from the Agnihotra sacrifices of saints 
resembling fire, enveloping the energy of the RSkshasas, 
spreads over the ten Cardinal quarters. And the fierce 
austerities of vow-observing saints, performed at particular 

I * The Kali Yuga.— T. 

t While ranging the three worlds on a career of conquest, thou didst, 
disturbing sacrifices, etc ) wrong righteousness.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQfe 




YVDD H A Kl NDA M. 



1203 



sacred spots, try the RSkshasas sore. Thou hast obtained a 
boon, conferring immunity at the hands of deities, Danavas 
and Yakshas. But men and monkeys, bears and Goiangulas, 
possessed of enormous strength and endowed with vigor, 
and of indomitable prowess, — coming here, are setting up 
roars. Witnessing various and many dire portents, I perceive 
the destruction of all the R&kshasas. Dreadful and terrific 
clouds, uttering harsh sounds, are showering blood all around 
Lanka. And (live) vehicles are dropping profuse tears. 
And all sides, covered with dust, do not appear bright as 
formerly. And beasts of prey, jackals and vultures, are 
emitting frightful cries, and, entering into the garden of 
Lanka, form themselves into bands. And in dreams 
mighty dark-hued women in front of dwellings, seizing at (the 
furniture ) thereof, and speaking inauspiciously, laugh 
displaying their sable teeth. And in houses dogs are feasting 
on the articles of worship. And cows bring forth asses, and 
mungooses, mice. And cats are pairing with leopards, and 
swine with dogs, and Kinnaras with Rakshasas and human 
beings. And red-footed white sky-coursing pigeons, urged on 
by Doom, are going about for the destruction of the 
RSLkshasas. And female-parrots in houses, wounded and 
worsted by other birds delighting in discord, are drop- 
ping down, emitting indistinct notes. And all the birds 
and beasts are crying (distressfully) with their faces turned 
towards the sun. And at dusk a frightful, withered, tawny- 
hued male figure, looking like Death himself, with his head 
shaven, peereth into the houses (of people), These and 
other evil omens occur. Rama I deem as Vishnu assuming 
the form of a man. Raghava of steady prowess, for certain, 
is no human being, — he that hath built a bridge over the 
deep, must be an exceedingly wonderful person. Therefore, 
0 Ravana, conclude peace with Rama— king of men. Having 
ascertained fit course, do thou act properly.” Having said 
this unto that vile one, and known the intention of the lord 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1204 



RlMlYANA . 



of Rakshas, that strong MSlyavan, of exceeding prowess, 
became silent, eying Ravana. 



SECTION xxxvi. 



The Ten-necked one, come under the control of Time, 
did not brook the beneficial speech spoken by Malyavan. 
Contracting his face into a frown, he, coming under the 
masterdom of passion, with his eyes rolling in wrath, 
addressed Malyavin, saying, — ‘‘The words which, deeming 
the strength of the enemy as superior, thou hast harshly 
spoken, considering it as beneficial, had never before 
entered my ears. A (mere) man, and feeble, and alone, and 
having monkeys for his support, why dost thou deem Rama, 
who hath (further) been cast off by his sire, and hath in 
consequence taken refuge in the woods,— as competent (to 
cope with me) ? And why dost thou consider me, who am 
the lord of the Rakshas, and feared even by the immortals, — 
as weak and reft of all power ? Thou, I suspect, speakest 
(thus) roughly either from jealousy of my heroism, or 
for inciting me. And who that is wise and learned, ever 
addresseth him roughly that is at once puissant and of (high) 
station, if not to spur him on ? Why, having brought Sita 
like a Sri shorn of her lotus, shall I give her up, from fear of 
Raghava ? Behold Raghava, environed by Kotis of monkeys, 
with Sugriva and Lakshmana, slain one of these days ! He 
before whom even the gods cannot stay in the field, — how 
can that Ravana ever come by fear ? Better that I should 
be riven in twain, — but bend I never will. This is my native 
fault ; and nature is incapable of being overcome. And if 
RSma hath at his pleasure constructed a bridge over the 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




r LDDHA KANDAM. 



1205 



ocean, what is the wonder in this that thou hast conceived 
such a fear ? And although R3ma hath crossed the ocean 
along with the monkey-army, yet I swear unto thee truly, 
living, he shall not back hence. ,, When RSvana, wrought up 
with passion, had spoken thus, M§lyav3n, knowing him 
wroth, did not return a reply. And, duly tendering blessings 
unto the king, M§lyav§n, taking his permission, went to his 
own abode. And the Rakshasa, RSvana, along with his 
courtiers, having consulted together as to what was fit to be 
done, set about the defence of Lanka. And he commanded 
the Rakshasa Prahasta (to guard) the Eastern gate ; and the 
exceedingly powerful Mah 2 ipar 9 wa and Maliodara (to guard) 
the Southern gate; and he ordered his son Indrajit, possessing 
mighty powers of illusion, girt by innumerable Rakshasas, 
to guard the Western gate. And he commanded Suka and 
Sdrana to defend the Northern gate. But he said unto the 
counsellors, — “ I will myself go thither.”* And he posted 
in the middle in the garrison the Rakshasa, Virupakslia, 
endowed with exceeding prowess and energy, backed by 
countless RSkshasas. Having taken these measures in 
Lank§, the R§kshasa-chief, urged by Fate, deemed himself 
as having achieved success. Having thus completely provided 
for the defence of the city, he dismissed the ministers ; and, 
honored by the counsellors with blessings of victory, (then) 
entered his magnificent and splendid inner apartment. 



SECTION XXXVII. 



Those kings, man and monkey, that monkey the Wind- 
god’s son, JimbavSn — sovereign of bears— the R&kshasa, 

* i. e. to defend the Northern gate. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 





1206 



KAa/A FA iVa. 



Bibhishana, the son of Vali, Angada, SumitrSL’s son, the 
monkey, Sarabha, Sushena along with his friends, Kumuda, 
Nala, and Panama, arriving at the dominions of the enemy, 
assembled together, began to deliberate, “Yonder is that 
Lanka ruled by Ravana, invincible even unto the celestials, 
serpents and Gandharvas. Let us, keeping before us success 
in the enterprise, consult together for the purpose of arriving 
at a decision. We are here daily nearing Ravana, lord of 
Rakshasas.” As they were speaking thus, Ravana’s younger 
brother, Bibhishana, said in a pregnant speech free from 
provinicialism, — “Anala, Pana9a, Sampati and Pramati — all 
courtiers of mine — having gone up to Lanka, have come back 
here. Wearing the forms of birds, they entered into the 
hostile forces $ and, having seen the measures that had been 
adopted (by them , have come (back). O Rama, hearken to 
me as I tell thee truly anent the provisions which they have 
related, made by the wicked-minded Ravana. In the Eastern 
gate stayeth Prahasta along with his forces ; in the Southern, 
the exceedingly powerful MahapSr^wa and Mahodara ; and 
in the Western* RSvana's son, Indrajit, supported t>y innumer- 
able Rakshasas, equipped with pattigas , swords and bows, 
and bearing darts and maces in their hands,— surrounded by 
heroes carrying various weapons. And, backed by many 
thousands of Rakshasas weilding weapons, and accompanied 
by Rakshasas conversant with counsel, Ravana himself, his 
heart agitated to the height, guardeth the Northern gate of 
the city. And Virupaksha with a powerful force accoutred 
in javelins, dubs and bows, protects the garrison in the centre. 
Having seen these hosts thus disposed in Lanka, my 
counsellors have speedily come back here. There are ten 
thousand elephants, an Ayuta cars, two of horses, and, about 
a koti of Rakshasas, powerful and strong, and equipped 
with arms in conflict* These night-rangers are ever the 
favorites of the Rakshasa ruler. And, O king, a koti of 

♦ These are, remarks the commentator, the leaders. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



YUDDHA KkNDA Mi 



1207 



forces accompany each of these Rakshasas in battle.” 
Having conveyed this information concerning Lank£, which 
had been communicated by his counsellors, the mighty-armed 
Bibhishana showed (unto R&ma) those RSkshasas themselves. 
And in company with his counsellors, R£vana’s graceful 
younger brother, ever striving for the welfare of Rima, by 
way of answer communicated everything that was going 
forward in Lanka unto RSma, having eyes resembling 
lotus-leaves, — “O R§ma, when Ravana battled with Kuvera, 
sixty lacs of RSkshasas marched forth (to meet him). In 
prowess, energy, vigor, exceeding fortitude, and hauteur, they 
resembled the wicked-minded R&vana himself. In this 
matter, thou ought not to grow wroth, — I only arouse thy 
wrath, and do not endeavour to frighten thee.* Thou canst 
subdue even the celestials by thy prowess. Therefore thou, 
environed by a mighty army, having arrayed the monkey- 
forces in order of battle, shalt thrash Ravana (in battle).” 
When Ravana* s younger brother had spoken thus, Raghava, 
said these words with reference to his beating the foe, — “Let 
that foremost of monkeys, Nila, surrounded by an immense 
number of monkeys, cope with Prahasta at the Eastern gate 
of Lanka. And, engirt by a mighty force, let Angada, son 
of Vaii, resist Mah&par^wa and Mahodara at the Southern 
gate (thereof). And let that son of the Wind-god, HanumSn, 
backed by innumerable monkeys, (beating the host stationed) 
at the Western gate, find entrance (into the city). 1 myself, 
determined to compass the destruction of the lord of 
R&kshasas, who, waxing powerful in consequence of the boon 
he hath received, hath brought about the destruction of 
high-souled saints resembling gods and D&navas, — and who 
goeth round all regions, oppressing people, — will, along with 
Sumitr&’s son, smiting (the foe), occupy the Northern entrance, 
where R&vana with his army is stationed. And let the 

* i. e. Thou ought not to be angry with me ; for I do not frighten thee, but 
rouse thy wrath against Rdvana." — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 





1208 



RAMlrANA . 



powerful king of monkeys, and the puissant sovereign of 
bears, and the younger brother of the R&kshasa-chief, manage 
the soldiery posted in the centre. And in this battle, the 
monkeys need not assume the forms of human being. And 
let this serve for a sign that the monkeys, in order to the 
recognition of our own forces, appear with their proper 
monkey-marks. We seven only shall battle with the foe 
in human shapes, — viz., I along with my brother, the 
exceedingly energetic Lakshmana, and my friend Bibhishana 
counting for the fifth in company with his own following.** 
Having said this unto Bibhishana for attaining success in the 
enterprise, that lord, the intelligent R3ma, seeing the sides 
of Suvela more beautiful (than other places), intended to 
ascend it. Then, environed by a mighty host, the high- 
souled and magnanimous Rama, his features mirroring forth 
high exultation, — overshadowing the entire Earth (with his 
forces), set out for Lanka, determined upon destroying 
the enemy. 



SECTION XXXVIII. 



Having been bent upon mounting Suvela, R&ma, 
followed by Lakshmana, addressed in sweet and excellent 
words, Sugriva, and that righteous night-ranger, Bibhi- 
shana, versed in counsel and conversant with precepts, 
who was devoted to him, — saying,—' “We shall all ascend this 
mount Suvela, bedight with metals $ and pass this night 
even here. And (from here) will we view the abode of that 
R&kshasa who, foul of soul, hath carried off my spouse, to 
bring destruction down on himself, — who knoweth nor 
morality nor good conduct nor behaviour (conducive to the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




) 0 DDHA KKnda M. 



1209 



dignity of his descent), — and who, in consequence of his base 
propensity, hath committed himself to so heinous a course of 
action.” Having decided thus, R&ma, filled with wrath at 
R&vana, coming to Suvela, ascended its variegated plateau. 
And Lakshmana, collected, went in his wake. And, upraising 
bow and arrow, Sugriva, (ever) engaged in valorous acts, 
accompanied with Bibhishana as well as his counselors, 
following him, also ascended (the mountain). And all those 
rangers of mountains, gifted with the vehemence of the Wind 
in hundreds ascended mount Suvela, where Raghava wa« 
stationed. And ascending the mountain in a short time, they 
all beheld from its summit the city, appearing to be built on 
the air. And the monkey-leaders beheld Lanka, exceedingly 
splendid with noble gateways ; gracefully enclosed with a 
wall ; thronging with R&kshasas \ and defended by sable 
Rlkshasas. And the foremost of monkeys saw these appear- 
ing like another wall (overtopping the one beneath). And on 
seeing the Rakshasas, the monkeys burning for battle set up 
various roars in the presence of Rama. Then the Sun, 
crimsoned with Eve, ascended the Setting-hill ; and Night 
came, illumined by the Moon at his full. Then the master of 
the monkey-army, Rama, saluted and honored by Bibhishana, 
accompanied by Lakshmana as well as the leaders of the 
monkeys, sojourned happily on the breast of Suvela. 



SECTION xxxix. 



Having passed the night in Suvela, the heroic monkey- 
leaders surveyed woods and forests in Lanka. And seeing 
those extensive (woods and forests), mild, and charming, and 
beautiful to behold, they were seized with wonderment. 

152 



Die ' by t^ooQie 




1210 



RlMXYANA . 



Abounding in champakas , agokas , vakulas, galas, and palms ; 
covered with tamalas and panagas, — and environed all 
around with trees, — and surrounded with H in talas, Aryunas, 
blossoming Saptaparnas , Tilakas, Karnikaras, and Patalas, — 
trees with flowering tops, entertwined with creepers, — Lanka 
looked exceedingly lovely, with various sights, — resembling 
the Amaravati herself of Indra. And trees there, furnished 
with variegated flowers having tender rosy leaves,— and blue 
lawns, and rows of woods ; and bearing odourous and 
charming blossoms and fruits, — looked like men adorned 
with ornaments. And there a delightful and pleasant wood 
resembling Chaitraratha,and like unto Nandana itself — having 
all the seasons present, — appeared beauteous to the view, with 
black bees all around And it had Datyuhas, and Koyasthivas, 
and peacocks dancing • and the strains of the coels were 
heard at the woodland rills. And the heroic and exhilarated 
monkeys, capable of wearing forms at pleasure, entered those 
woods and groves frequented by maddened birds and ranged 
by Bhramaras, — tracts overflowing with the lays of coels, 
and ringing with the voices of songsters, — resonant with the 
notes of Bhramaras — sovereigns of their species — and 
eloquent with the cries of ospreys. And as the exceedingly 
energetic monkeys entered, there blew upon them the breeze 
— like unto life — redolent of perfume obtained from contact 
with the blossoms. And others of the leaders among the 
heroic monkeys, coming out from the bands, ordered by 
Sugriva, made in the direction of Lanka crowned with 
ensigns. And, terrifying the fowls and dispiriting beasts 
and birds and shaking Lanka with their roars, those fore- 
most monkeys set up shouts. And they, endowed with great 
impetuosity, went on, oppressing the earth with their 
battle-array ; and clouds of dust suddenly arose from the 
the march of the soldiery. And bears, and lions, and 
buffaloes, and elephants, and deer, and birds, overwhelmed 
with affright, made for the ten cardinal points. The graceful 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKlNDAM. 



1211 



and lovely summit of Trikuta was entire, elevated, sky- 
piercing, of golden splendour, measuring an hundred yoyanas> 
clear-shining, level, inaccessible even to fowls, and incapable 
of being ascended even in thought — not to say of actual ascen- 
sion by people. Lank&, ruled by RSvana, was situated on 
its* top, — ten yoyanas in width and twenty in length. And 
that city was graced with lofty ornamented gateways 
resembling pale clouds, and golden and silvern walls ; and 
LankSl was adorned with palaces and piles ; like the skyt N 
graced with clouds on the approach of the rainy season. / 
And that palace, which was adorned with thousands of pillars, 
and which, as if piercing the heavens, looked like a peak of 
Kailua — was the residence of the Sovereign of the 
Rlkshasas — the ornament of the city, (ever guarded by full 
hundreds of R&kshasas. And Lakshmana’s auspicious and 
puissant elder brother, beholding that flourishing and wealthy 
city resembling the celestial regions, — charming to the mind, 
made of gold, graced with mountains, and decked out with 
mountains containing various metals, — resonant with the 
notes of various birds ; abounding in various beasts,— 
furnished with various kinds of flowers, — and inhabited by 
various orders of Rakshasas, — was struck with astonishment. 

And R&ma, surrounded by his mighty forces, saw that palace, 
filled with diverse kinds of gems, adorned with rows of 
edifices, and having huge engines and gateways. 

• Trikuta’s. — T. 

t Madhyamam Vaishnavam padam — the middle foot of Vishnu. When v 
Vishnu in his Dwarf-form took the conceit out of Vdli, the renowned Asura 
king, — he covered the earth with one pace, the sky with another and heaven j 
with the last.— T. 



Digitized by 



Google 




1212 



rAiuXvanj. 



SECT/ON XL. 



Then R&ma, accompanied by the monkey-leaders, 
along with Sugriva, ascended the top of Suvela, measuring 
a circumference of two yoyanas . And staying there for a 
while and looking at the ten cardinal points, he saw LankSL 
finely placed on the charming summit of Trikuta, — graced 
with elegant groves ; and (he also saw) the unconquerable 
lord of RSkshasas, stationed at the top of the gateway, 
fanned with white chdmaras ; graced with the umbrella 
betokening victory ; smeared with red sandal ; adorned in red 
ornaments ; resembling masses of sable clouds ; and apparelled 
in golden attire, — his breast bearing scars from the tusk-ends 
of Air&vata ; covered with a sheet hued like the blood of 
hares; and appearing like clouds lighted up by the evening 
sun. And on seeing the Rakshasa-chief, Sugriva suddenly rose 
up in the sight of the lords of monkeys as well as RSghava. 
And influenced by wrath, he, mustering strength and vigor, 
rising from the brow of the mountain, bounded to the 
gateway. And pausing for a while and eying the Rakshasa 
intrepidly, he, slighting the Raksha, addressed him in harsh 
speech, saying, — “O Rakshasa, I am the friend as well as 
the slave of Rama — lord of men. Me, backed by the energy 
of that king of the Earth, shalt thou not escape to-day.” 
Saying this, he, suddenly springing up, descended on him ; 
and snatching away his variegated crown, let it fall on the 
earth. And seeing him come abruptly, the night-ranger 
spoke to him thus,— “Thou that wert Sugriva beyond my 
ken, shalt be neckless* near me.” Having said this, he 

♦ The text has hinagriva — neckless. There is a pun here, turning on the 
word grivd — neck. R&vana says : "Thou wert Sugriva (good-necked) in my 
absence, — but now thou shalt be hinagriva — neckless." — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





yuddhakXndam. 



12! 3 

rose up swiftly and dragged him* down to the earth. 
Thereat springing like pith, the monkey pushed down his 
antagonist with his arms. And each having his body bathed 
in sweat and his person covered with blood, each choking and 
annuling the efforts of the other, — and resembling a Sdlmali 
or a Kinguka , and dealing blows and slaps, and hitting with 
his arms and hands, — those exceedingly strong ones, the 
lord of the RSkshasas and that of the monkeys, fought 
wonderfully. And having for a long time encountered each 
other in combat on the dais belonging to the gate, — they, 
now lifting up their persons and now lowering them, went 
down, each felling the other with his legs. And smiting 
each other, they, their bodies fastened together, went down 
between the wall and the moat, — and again stood upon the 
ground. And heaving breath, they, resting for a space, 
grappled with each other ; and they fast bound each other 
with their arms serving for ropes. And each fired with 
wrath, and each having both strength and skill, they now bore 
themselves in the lists like a tiger and a lion, furnished with 
teeth ; or like the young of the foremost elephants engaged 
in encounter, — and restraining and pushing each other with 
their arms, they simultaneously both came down to the 
ground. Then starting again to their feet, they, vituperating 
each other, ranged the lists, displaying feats expressive of 
skill and strength. Nor did those heroes speedily come by 
fatigue. And resembling mighty elephants, they, resisting 
each other by means of their powerful arms like unto the 
trunks of elephants, fought for a long while, swiftly wheeling 
about the arena. And approaching each other, they strove 
to slay each other, like unto two cats seated, momentarily 
encountering each other over some food. And the 
lord of monkeys and Ravana, accomplished in fight, 
coursed the arena, displaying wonderful mandalas ,t various 

* Sugriva. 

t A mandala is of four kinds, vis., chdri,karana, khanda and malidmandala . 



Digitized by 



Google 




1214 



xAMArANA. 



sthdnas/a) curious gomutrakas,{b) gatapratyagatas, tiraschi- 
nagataSy vakragatas> parimokshas , varjanaSy paridhavanaSy 
abhidravanas/c) aplavanas.id) savigrahdvasthanas/e) para - 
vrittaSy(f) apdvrittas^g) apadrutas } {h ) avaplutas>(i) apanyas- 
tasy(j) and upanyastas.(k ) In the meanwhile the Raksha 
attempted to put forth his power of illusion. Knowing 
this, the king of monkeys shot into the sky. And Ravana, 
overpowered by fatigue and out of breath, thus baffled by 
the monkey-kirg, stcod where he was. Thus the master of 
the foremost monkeys, securing fame in fight, beat the night- 
ranger, causing him to experience fatigue. And bounding 
beyond the spacious sky, the offspring of the Sun came to the 
side of Rama in the midst of the monkey-forces. And having 
done that deed, the son of the Sun, — lord of monkeys — with 
his heart surcharged with rejoicing, entered that host having 
the speed of the wind ; enhancing the martial ardour of the 
son of the foremost of the Raghus, and honored by the 
monkeys. 

Proceeding with one leg advanced is chdri } with two alternately advanced is 
karana ; proceeding after the manner of karana t with some special movements, 
is khanda ; and two or three khandas combined is a mahdmandala. — T. 

(а) A particular adjustment of the steps successively ; awry, etc . — It is of 
six kinds, viz. } Vaishnava , Sampdda, Vaifdkha, Mandaia, Pratydlirlxa and 
Andlirha.— T. 

(б) A kind of motion resembling cow’s urine flowing, as its name signifies. 

(c) Swiftly fronting the antagonist. 

(d) Proceeding ‘like a summer’s cloud/ 

(*) Standing before the adversary, after making others engage in combat. 
What this means in the passage under notice is hard to divine. 

(/) Turning away from a foe. 

( g ) Moving off from the side of the enemy. 

( h ) Movement with low posture for seizing at the thighs of the'adversary. 

(>) Going for a. kick at the adversary. 

(/) Distending the chest, so that the antagonist may not catch the arms. 

(&) Stretching forth the arms for seizing those of the enemy. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUhDHAKlNDAM 



1215 



SECTION X LI. 



j^EEING those ominous signs, Lakshmana’s elder brother, 
Ram§, embracing Sugriva, said, — “Without consulting with 
me, thou hast acted thus rashly. But kings should not act 
in such a rash way. Placing in suspense, me, this army 
and Bibhishana, thou, O hero, enamoured of daring deeds, 
hast put thyself to all this trouble. But, O hero, henceforth, 
do not act so. O subduer of enemies, if thou come by any 
mischance, what shall Sita avail me ; or Bh&rata ; or my 
younger brother — Lakshmana ; or Satrughna, O slayer of 
enemies ; or, again, my own person ? Ere thou hadst come, 
1 had arrived at this determination ; albeit, O thou that art 
equal to the mighty Indra or Varuna, I knew thy prowess full 
well. Slaying Ravana in battle along with his sons, forces 
and vehicles, and installing Bibhishana in Lank&, and placing 
the kingdom in the hands of Bharata, I shall renounce my 
body, O exceedingly powerful one !” When Rama had said 
this, Sugriva answered, — “Knowing my own strength, how, 
0 Raghava, viewing Ravana, who had ravished away thy 
wife, could I forbear, O hero ?” As that hero was speaking 
thus, R&ghava addressed Lakshmana having auspiciousness, 
thus,— 4l O Lakshmana, occupying some tract furnished with 
cool water and woods bearing fruits, we shall sojourn, 
dividing and marshalling our forces. I see a mighty fear 
present, destructive of people, — and boding destruction unto 
the foremost heroes among the bears, monkeys and 
R&kshasas. The winds ruffle ; and the earth is tremulous. 
And the tops of mountains tremble, and the mountains 
themselves send up loud souuds. And the clouds are 
goblinish ; and fierce ; and harsh-sounding. And wearing 
terrific looks, they fiercely pour down showers mixed with 
drops of blood. And the Evening resembles the red sandal, 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1 2 16 



KAA/AyjWA. 



and is fearful. And a flaming circle droppeth from the Sun. 
And exciting great fear, inauspicious birds and beasts, 
wearing cruel looks, and in distressful guise, — cry in piteous 
accents, facing the Sun. And at night, the ominous Moon 
with a black-red brim as at the time of universal wreck, 
burneth. And, O Lakshmana, there is a crimson, rough, 
slight, and graceful rim round the Sun ; and a blue mark is 
visible on his disc. And the stars do not course as formerly. 
Behold, O Lakshmana, all these, prefiguring the Doom. 
And crows and hawks and vultures drop down. And 
jackals yell with loud inauspicious notes. The Earth, 
converted into mud with flesh and gore, shall be covered 
with darts and javelins and swords, discharged by Rak- 
shasas and monkeys. This very day with all expedition 
shall we, surrounded on all sides by the monkeys, march 
towards the city governed by Ravana.” Having said this 
unto Lakshmana, Lakshmana’s elder brother possessed of 
exceeding strength, hastily descended from the top of the 
mountain. And descending from the mountain, the righteous 
R&ghava surveyed his troops, incapable of being beaten 
by enemies. And after making the mighty host of the 
monkey-king equip itself, Raghava versed in season, along 
with Sugriva, at the proper hour, issued orders for battle. 
Then in due time that one, accoutred with his bow, surround- 
ed by a mighty army, set out, with the intention of entering 
the city of Lanka. And those two — Bibhishana and 
Sugriva — and Hanumin, and Jamvab&n, and Nala, and the 
bear-king Nila, and Lakshmana, followed (Rama). Behind 
them, the mighty array of bears and monkeys followed 
Raghava, cevering a wide surface of land. The monkeys, 
resembling elephants, capable of resisting foes, took 
mountain-peaks and tall trees by hundreds. And in a short 
time those repressors of foes — the brothers R&tna and 
Lakshmana — arrived at the city of Ravana ; with pennons 
streaming over her ; charming ; garnished with groves and 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YIDDHAKANDAM. 



1217 



woods ; having variegated gateways; inaccessible; and having 
walls and gates. And urged on by Rama’s command, 
the wood-rangers,* as commanded, blocking up ( Lank 5. ) 
incapable of being subdued even by the gods, stationed them- 
selves. Coming to LankSL ruled by R&vana, that hero, R§ma, 
son unto Da$aratha, along with Lakshmana, remained stationed 
at the Northern gate, where RSvana used to reside. None 
save R&ma was competent to protect that dreadful gate, 
where R£vana used to reside. None save R&ma was 
competent to protect that dreadful gate, guarded by R§vana 
himself, like the Ocean guarded by Varuna, — and protected 
on all sides by terrible Rikshasas equipped with weapons ; 
capable of striking terror into the weak ; like unto the 
nether regions guarded by Dinavas. And (Rama) saw there 
many and various arms and mail of the warriors, ranged 
together. And coming to the Eastern gate, that leader of the 
monkey-army, the powerful Nila, along with Mainda and- 
Dwivida, — took up his post there. And the exceedingly 
strong Angada, accompanied by Rishava, Gav&ksha, Gaya, 
and Gavaya, occupied the Southern gate. And the mighty 
monkey HanumSn protected the Western entrance. And 
Sugriva himself, with Prajangha, Tarasa and other heroes, 
was quartered near the garrision in the centre. And 
accompanied by all the foremost monkeys resembling Su- 
parna or the Wind, twenty kotis of renowned monkey-leaders, 
blocking up all sides, stationed themselves near the monkey, 
Sugriva. And at Rima’s command, Lakshmana along witli 
Bibhishana, went from door to door, issuing instructions to 
kotis of monkeys. On the west of Rama, JambavSn along 
with Sushena, followed by innumerable troops, remained 
hard by at the garrison in the middle. And those tiger-like 
monkeys, furnished with teeth like unto tigers, weilding trees 
and mountain-tops, stood ready for fight. And all had their 
tails curled up, and all were armed with teeth and nails, and 

* Monkeys. 

>53 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





RAMA y A IV A. 



ill 8 

all bad chequered bodies,and all had frightful faces. And some 
had the strength of ten elephants ; and some had strength ten 
times as much ; and some of the monkey-leaders there had 
the strength of a thousand elephants,— and some had the 
strength of numbers (of elephants) ; and some had strength 
hundred times as much. And others had immeasurable might. 
And wonderful and astonishing was their meeting. And the 
concourse at that place of the monkey-forces was like the 
concourse of locusts. And the air was filled up, and the 
earth was covered quite with the monkeys coursing towards 
Lank& and dropping down into it. And hundreds and 
thousands making up the army of monkeys, arrived at the 
•gate of Lank2 ; while others were pouring in from all sides 
for encounter. And that mount was covered with monkeys. 
And a thousand ayutas were going round the city. And 
Lank&, blocked up everywhere with powerful monkeys bearing 
trees in their hands, was incapable of being entered even by 
the Wind. And the Rakshasas, sore pressed by thousands 
of monkeys resembling masses of clouds, and like unto Sakra 
himself in battle, were seized with amazement. And like 
unto the roar of water on the ocean being riven, there arose 
a mighty tumult in consequence of the forces surging hither 
and thither. And with that sound the entire Lanka, with her 
wall and gateways, her mountains, woods, and forests, began 
to shake. And that army, protected by Rama and Lakshmana 
as well as Sugriva, became all the more invincible even by 
the Asuras and celestials. And having arranged his forces 
with the view of destroying the Rakshas, Righava, versed 
in the resources of war,* taking counsel of the counsellors, 
and deciding again and again his course of action, — intending 
to adopt further measures, — resolved to abide by the advice 
of Bibhishanaf, remembering the morality regulating 

* conciliation, &c. 

t Which was, — *• If Rdvana should seek thy succour, thou shouldst 
confer on him his kingdom.”— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



yuddhakAndam. 



1219 



monarchs*. And then, calling VSUi's son, Angada, (R&ma) 
said, — “ O mild one, going to the Ten-necked one, tell him 
in my words, — ‘Bounding over the deep and casting off fear 
and dejection, I have laid seige to the city of Lankft; and 
have reft thee of thy prosperity and thy wealth ; and 
rendered thee moribund and senseless. Thou hast, O night- 
ranger, through delusion and pride injured saints and 
celestials, and Gandharvas and ApsarSs, and Serpents, and 
Yakshas, and crowned heads. But, O Rakshasa, thy pride 
begot of the boon received from the Self-create hath gone 
from thee, whose destroyer,! I, afflicted in consequence of 
my wife having been carried off, — weilding the rod, have 
sat down at the door of Lank§. O R&kshasa, thou shalt, 
remaining steady in fight, attain the state of celestials 
and Maharshis and R£jarshis. And, O worst of RSkshasas, 
do thou display that prowess of thine by which, aided by thy 
power of illusion, thou hast forcibly carried off Sit§, 
disregarding me. I shall with my sharpened shafts render 
this world free from R&kshasas, unless rendering back 
Mithila's daughter, thou throw thyself on my mercy. And, 
for certain, that foremost of R&kshasas, the righteous and 
graceful Bibhishana, who hath joined us, shall obtain, without 
having a thorn in his side, all tins wealth of Lank&. For 
thou, foolish, wicked, ignorant of self-knowledge, and having 
dolts for counsellors, art not competent to unrighteously 
exercise kingship for a moment. Fight thou, O R&kshasa, 
summoning fortitude and heroism. On being slain with my 
shafts, thou shalt attain peace. J O night-ranger, if thou 
shoiildst range the three worlds in the shape of a bird, thou, 
coming in my ken, shalt not be able to preserve thy life. I t 

• In this connection, the principle referred to is : " If a king can accom- 
plish his purpose by conciliation, he should not employ punishment." — T . 

t Dandadhara — lit.— rod-bearing, a name of Yama,— who is described as 
weilding a rod for chastising wrong-doers.— T. 

X i. e. attain heaven.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



1220 



RAmATaNA. 



is all this for thy good ; do thou perform acts for the good of 
thy body surviving death ; and do thou see Lank§, well % 
for thy life is in my keeping.*” Thus addressed by Rama of 
untiring deeds, TSIr&’s son went through the welkin like the 
embodied bearer of sacrificial offerings.* And arriving 
near that subduer of enemies, RSvana, in a moment, that 
graceful one saw R&vana, sitting calmly in the midst of his 
ministers. And dropping down in his vicinity like a flaming 
fire, that best of monkeys, Angada, resembling a golden 
bracelet, t stood there. And then introducing himself, 
Angada delivered unto Ravana along with his ministers all 
that R&ma had excellently spoken unto him, neither 
extenuating nor setting down aught of himself, — “1 am the 
envoy of the king of Ko9ala— Rama of untiring deeds ; and 
1 am the son of Vali. — I do not know whether thou hast 
heard of me. And Raghu’s son, RSma — enhancer of 
Kaugaly&’s joy — hath said unto thee,— ** Do thou, O fell one, 
coming out, give me battle and prove thy prowess. Thee 
shall I slay together with thy ministers, and with thy sons 
and relations and friends. And thou being slain, the three 
worlds shall attain peace. And to-day shall I destroy the 
enemy of the gods and D&navas, and Yakshas, of the 
Gandharvas, serpents and Rakshasas, — and the thorn (in the 
side of) the saints. And on thee being slain, all the wealth 
shall be Bihhishana*s } unless, bowing down (unto me) and 
paying me homage, thou render back Maithili.”* When that 
monkey-chief had spoken thus, the lord of the night-rangers 
was wrought up with wrath. And coming under the sway of 
passion, he commanded his counsellors, saying, — “Take 
this one of perverse understanding, and slay him at once 11 . 

* Fire. 

t This simile is hardly happy ; but the lore was even the name of the 
monkey, Angada suggested kanakdngada — golden bracelet. This typifies the 
tendency prevailing to this day of Hindu authors to exercise their ingenuity in 
puns. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





run dha kAnda at. 



Mil 



Hearing Ravana’s speech, four grim-visaged night rangers 
seized (Angada) flaming in energy like fire itself. And 
T&rSL’s son suffered himself to be taken, in order that the 
hero might then display his prowess before the Yktudhftnas.* 
Then Angada, taking them up, who were pressed against his 
arms, like insects, — leapt up on a palace resembling a hill. 
Thereat, in consequence of the impetuosity of his bound, the 
Rlkshasas, slipping off, fell on to the ground in the very 
sight of the Rkkshasa king. Then the powerful son of VSli 
with his legs attacked the top of that palace, elevated like a 
hill,+ of the lord of RSkshasas. And thereat, as formerly 
the summit of the HimavSn had been cleft by the thunder- 
bolt, the palace, thus assailed, was split in the very presence 
of the Ten-necked one. Having reft the top of the edifice, 
and proclaimed his name, Angada, setting up a mighty 
roar, sprang into the sky. And, aggrieving the Rlkshasas 
and rejoicing all the monkeys, he came back to the 
side of RSma in the midst of the monkeys. RSvana was 
transported with wrath in consequence of the breaking down 
of the palace. And, finding his destruction (at hand), he 
began to heave sighs. And Rima, surrounded by innumer- 
able delighted monkeys setting up shouts, — anxious for 
slaying his foe, prepared for battle. And at the command 
of Sugriva, the exceedingly powerful monkey — Sushena— 
resembling a mountain-summit, surrounded by a large number 
of monkeys capable of assuming shapes at pleasure, began 
to range from door to door ;J like the Moon ranging the stars. 
Seeing the hundred akshauhinis of the wood*rangers, 
stationed in L&nka, extending down to the sea, some of 
the R&kshasas were struck with astonishment, while some 

* Rdkshasas. 

f The commentator, however, would make dadarqa — saw*— understood. 
"Angada saw that the palace was high like a hill, etc." This is unne- 
cessary. — T. 

t For protecting the entire army, as well as for procuring information of 
the movements of the enemy. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1222 



rXaiIfana. 



came undet the influence of fear; and some experienced 
delight from the (anticipated) delight of battle. And the 
space between the well and the moat all was flooded with 
monkeys. And the distressed RSkshasas saw the wall 
thronging with monkeys ;* and thereat exclaiming ‘‘Alas** 
“Alas,” the RSkshasas were extremely terrified. And on 
that frightful uproar arising, the warriors of the R&kshasa 
monarch, — RSkshasas — seizing mighty arms, began to patrol 
about, like unto winds blowing at the time of the universal 
dissolution. 



SECTION XLII. 



Then thoseRakshasas, going to that subduer of enemies, 
Ravana, informed him that Rama along with the monkeys 
had laid seige unto the city. Hearing the city beseiged, the 
night-ranger was enraged. And, hearing that double arrange- 
ments had been made (by Rama) in guarding the gateways, 
(Ravana) ascended the palace. He saw Lanka with her 
hills, woods, and forests, covered everywhere with innumer- 
able monkeys eager for encounter. And he saw the entire 
Earth tawneyed with the monkeys ; and he reflected within 
himself how he could destroy these. And reflecting for 
long, Ravana having expansive eyes, assuming patience, gazed 
at Raghava and the leader of monkeys. Raghava with 
his host was fast approaching (the wall) ; and Ravana saw 
Lanka defended on all sides by Rakshasas. And Da^aratha’s 
son, seeing Lanka crowned with variegated ensigns and 

* A translator cannot help a feeling of disappointment at the difference— «to 
the disadvantage of English — between Sanskrit and English. The original for 
thronging with monkeys’ is a verbal attributive — vdnarikrita — lit.monkeyed, — T. 



Digitized by v^.oc . e 





Y UDDHA KkNDA M. 



122 $ 



standards, mentally went to SitS, with a sad heart. “For my 
sake, here that one, Janaka’s daughter, having eyes resembl- 
ing those of a young deer, — is undergoing affliction ; and 
lieth down on the ground.” And aggrieved at the thought 
of Vaidehi, the righteous R&ma speedily commanded the 
monkeys to compass the destruction of the enemies. As 
Retina of untiring deeds said this, the monkeys, filling (the 
air) with leonine roars, began to press forward furiously. 
“We shall cleave Lank& with mountain-peaks,- or with our 
blows” — thus thought the leaders within themselves. And 
the monkey-leaders stood, raising up gigantic mountain- 
peaks and tops of mountains, and rooting up various trees. 
And for doing what was dear unto R£ma, that army, 
divided into separate parties, in the presence of the R&kshasa- 
chief commenced scaling Lankci. And those copper-faced 
ones of golden sheen, who had consecrated their lives to 
the service of R&ma, equipped with trees and rocks, began 
to throng upon Lank2. And the monkeys with trees and 
hill-tops and blows crushed countless gates and tops of 
walls^ and they filled the moat containing crystal water 
with dust, tops of crags, straw, and Wood. Then leaders 
of thousands and kotis and hundreds of kotis began to scale 
Lank&. And the monkeys crushed golden gateways ; and, 
breaking down gates resembling the tops of the summits of 
KaiUL(a, bounded roaring, some towards the wall and some 
all around. And resembling gigantic elephants, they rushed 
towards Lank&. “Victory to the mighty R&ma, and Victory 
to the exceedingly powerful Lakshmana, and Victory to 
king Sugriva, who is protected by R&ghava. 1 Thus shouting, 
those monkeys, wearing forms at will, sending up roars, 
rushed amain towards the wall of Lank&. And Virav&hu, 
Suvkhu,. Nala and Panama — leader of monkeys — breaking 
(a portion of) the wall, took up their post there. In the mean- 
time, (they) arranged the forces in order of battle. And the 
strong Kumuda, surrounded by ten kotis of victorious monkeys, 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




U24 



R\MkyANA. 



stood obstructing 1 the Eastern gate. And for backing him, 
there remained the monkey, Prasabha, as also the long-armed 
Panama, surrounded by monkeys. And obstructing the Southern 
entrance stood the strong and gallant monkey, Satavali, 
surrounded by twenty kotis. And the strong sire of TSrSL, the 
powerful Sushena, obstructed the Western gate, backed by 
kotis upon kotis (of monkeys). And obstructing the Northern 
gate, remained the puissant RSma himself along with Sumitri's 
son, as well as the king of monkeys — Sugriva. And that 
huge-bodied and dreadful GolSngala — the mighty and powerful 
Gav&ksha — surrounded by a kott\ remained by the side of 
RSma. And that destroyer of foes — the exceedingly mighty 
Dhumra of the bears of terrific wrath, remained by the side 
of Rama — where, surrounded by vigilant counsellors, and 
bearing a mace in his hand, stood the exceedingly strong 
Bibhishana, endowed with wonderful powers, in complete 
panoply. And Gaya, and Gav&ksha, and Gavaya, and 
Sarabha, and Gandhamidana, protected the monkey-army, 
coursing all around. And then, his soul wrought up with 
wrath, RSvana — lord of RSLkshasas — speedily ordered the 
whole host to sally out. Hearing those words, which came 
out from R&vana’s mouth, all of a sudden the night-rangers 
sent up a dreadful yell. Then awoke the kettle-drums, 
having moon-like pale faces,— sounded by means of 
golden sticks. And conchs by hundreds and by thousands, 
capable of producing loud blares, filled with air proceeding 
from the mouths of dreadful Rakshasas, — were winded. 
And with conchs placed in their mouths, those night-rangers, 
having bodies blue like those of Cukas, resembled masses of 
clouds, with lightning and cranes. And, commanded by RSvana, 
the troops cheerfully issued forth like the onrushing of the 
mighty main filling all at the time of the universal dis- 
solution. And then the monkey-army gave a roar, spreading 
all around ; and it seemed as if the sound filled all Malaya 
with its sides and caves. And sounds of conchs, and drums, 



Digitized by 



Google 




i’UDDHA KlNDA M. 



1225 



as well as the leonine shouts of the impetuous (warriors), 
made the earth, air, and ocean, resound ; and these mixed 
with the roars of elephants, the neighing of steeds, the 
rattle of the car-wheels, and the tread of the Rakshasas* 
feet. And in the meantime there commenced a mighty 
encounter between the Rakshasas and the monkeys, like that 
which took place of yore between the gods and the Asuras. 
And displaying their prowess, they* began to slaughter 
monkeys with maces, and darts, and adzes. And the vehe- 
ment monkeys (on their side) slaughtered RSkshasas with 
trees and tops of crags as well as with their nails and teeth. 
And a mighty sound arose of ‘Victory unto king Sugriva !* 
and ‘Victory unto thee, O king/ — each army taking the 
name of its king. And then other dreadful Rakshasas that were 
stationed upon the wall, dropping down, pierced the monkeys 
with darts and bhindipalas. And (thereat) the monkeys, 
flying into fury, descending to the earth and bounding, 
brought down the Rakshasas with their arms. And that 
encounter of the Rakshasas and the monkeys was mighty 
and wonderful, and the ground became wet with flesh and 
gore. 



SECTION XLIH. 



And as the high-souled monkeys and Rakshasas faught 
on, their wrath vastly increased at sight of each other’s 
forces. And furnished with steeds in golden trappings ; and 
elephants resembling flames of fire ; and cars appearing like 
(so many) suns ; and shining armour,— the valiant Rakshasas 
issued, making the ten cardinal points resound. The 

* Rakshasas. 

154 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




r a 3i Ay An a. 



1226 

Rakshasas of terrific exploits were burning for victory on 
behalf of Rlvana. — And the mighty monkey-army also, eager 
for victory, darted against the host of the Rakshas of dread- 
ful deeds. And in the meanwhile, as either party assailed 
the other, there took place single combats between the 
Raksliasas and the monkeys. And as Andhaka had combated 
with the Three-eyed (deity),* that Rikshasa, the exceedingly 
energetic Indrajit, faught with Angada, son unto Vali. 
Sampati, hard to bear, engaged with Prajangha ; and the 
monkey, HanumSn, entered into conflict with Jambumali. 
And Ravana’s younger brother, Bibhishana, fired with wrath, 
encountered Satrughna, endowed with exceeding impetuosity. 
And the highly powerful Nila engaged with Nikumbha. And 
Sugriva — lord of monkeys — undertook Praghasa, and the 
graceful Lakshmana was engaged with Virupaksha. And the 
exceedingly irrepressible Agniketu and the Rakshasa— 
Ragmiketu — and Mitraghna and Yajnakopa, were engaged 
with R5ma. And Vajramushthi encountered Mainda, and 
Aganiprabha, Dvvivida. And those foremost of monkeys 
faught with those dreadful Rakshasas, -the heroic and 
terrible Pratapana, incapable of being overcome in battle, 
was combating with Nala of terrific force ; and that lusty son 
of Righteousness, well-known as Sushena,— a mighty 
monkey battled with Vidyunmaii. And other fearful 
monkeys encountered other Raksliasas ; and many were the 
encounters that took place. And great and fierce was the 
engagement that took place between the heroic Rakshasas 
and monkeys burning for victory, capable of making people’s 
hair stand on end. And from the persons of the Rakshasas 
and the monkeys there flowed a river of gore, having hair 
for grass (growing on its banks), and the bodies of the warriors 
for pieces of planks floating (adown the current). Indrajit, 
growing enraged, with his mace dealt a blow at that tearer 
of hostile ranks, Angada, -like him of an hundred sacrifices 

* Siva, fabled to have three eyes,— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




yiddha k An dam 



1227 



striking with his thunderbolt. Thereat, that graceful monkey, 
Angada, gifted with vehemence, with his mace crushed his 
car decked in gold, together with the steeds and the 
charioteer. SampSti was pierced with three arrows by 
Prajangha ; and the former (in his turn) slew Prajangha on 
the edge of battle with an A^wakarna.* And Jambumali, 
mounted on a car, possessed of prodigious strength, fired 
with wrath, with all the access of force derived from his car, 
wounded Hanuman between his paps. Thereat, getting at his 
car, Hanuman — son unto the Wind-god — with a slap speedily 
crushed his adversary’s vehicle along with the Raksha. Then 
the terrific Pratapana, roaring, rushed at Nala ; and thereat 
Nala, with his body pierced with sharp shafts by that swift- 
handed Raksha, plucked out Pratapana’s eyes, and cast them 
to the earth. And that lord of monkeys, Sugriva, with a 
Saptaparna t swiftly slew Praghasa, who appeared to be 
devouring up the troops. And, tormenting the Rakshasa of 
dreadful form witii a shower of shafts, Lakshmana slew 
Virupaksha with a single arrow'. And the irrepressible 
Agniketu, the R&kshasa .Ra^miketu, Mitraghna and Yajna- 
kopa, with their arrows rendered Rama aflame. Thereat, 
Rama, growing wroth, in battle severed the heads of those 
four by means of four shafts, dreadful, and resembling the 
tongues of a flame. And Vajramushti was*slain in conflict 
by Mainda with a clenched fist 5 and down came he to the 
ground along with his car and horses, like a turret toppling 
(headlong). And Nikumbha in fight wounded Nila resem- 
bling a mass of blue collyrium, with sharpened shafts, — -as 
the Sun pierceth clouds with his rays. Again with an hundred 
arrows, that light-handed night-ranger pierced Nila in the 
field ; and Nikumbha laughed thereat. At this, even as 
Vishnu did in battle, Nila with a wheel of hisf car, cut off in 



* A kind of tree, 
t A tree. 

X Nikumbha' s. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





1228 



rAmAvana. 



conflict Nikumbha’s head together with that of his charioteer. 
And Dwivida, possessed of the touch of the Vajra and thunder- 
bolt, in the presence of the entire Rikshasa host hurled a 
mountain-peak at him that was endowed with the splendour 
of the thunder-bolt. And A9aniprabha in encounter pierced 
that foremost of monkeys, Dwivida, with shafts resembling 
thunder-bolts. Thereat, beside himself with wrath, with his 
entire body wounded with arrows, Dwivida with a sdla des- 
troyed A^aniprabha along with his car and horses. And 
Vidyunmali, mounted on a car, assailed Sushena with shafts 
decked with gold, and began to shout momentarily. Seeing 
him mounted on his car, Sushena — best of monkeys— -taking 
up a huge crag, swiftly brought his car down to the ground. 
Thereat, endowed with lightness, that night-ranger, Vidyun- 
mSli, at once extricating himself from his car, stood on the 
ground with a mace in his hand. Thereupon, that foremost of 
monkeys, Sushena, growing furious, taking up a gigantic 
crag, rushed at the night-ranger. And as he was descending, 
the night-ranger, VidyunmSli, with his mace swiftly hit at 
the breast of Sushena — greatest of monkeys. Thereat, 
without thinking at all of the terrific hit of the mace, that 
best of monkeys in mighty conflict brought down that* upon 
hist head. And, assailed with the crag, the night-ranger, 
Vidyunmali, having his chest crushed, fell down to the earth, 
deprived of life. And, like the celestials warring against the 
Daityas, the heroic monkeys warred on and confounded the 
valiant rangers of the night. And frightful was the field of 
battle, with darts, and other arms ; and clubs, and javelins, 
and lances, and other weapons ; and with broken cars, and 
war-horses, and mad horses slain, and monkeys and 
Rakshasas ; and wheels and akshas,% and yokes and 
standards,— broken and scattered over the ground ; and 



* The crag, which he had at first hit.— T. 
t Vidyunm&li’s. 

% A part of a wheel. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




yuddhakAndam. 



1229 

swarms of jackals began to range on all sides of the monkeys 
and the Rakshasas ; and Kavandhas* began to rise in that 
terrific encounter, resembling the encounter of the gods and 
the Asuras. Thus destroyed by the foremost of monkeys, the 
rangers of night, beyond themselves with the smell of 
blood, — eagerly wishing for the setting of the Sun.t again 
made active preparations for a renewal of the fight. 



SECTION X L I V . 



A S the monkeys and the Rakshasas thus faught on, the 
sun set, and the fatal Night came. And then commenced a 
night-engagement between the dreadful Rakshasas and the 
monkeys of fixed hostility, each party burning for victory. 
And in that profound darknesss, the monkeys and the 
Rakshasas began to slay each other, exclaiming, — Thou art 
a RSkshasa/ and ‘Thou art a monkey. 1 And in that army 
there was heard a mighty uproar of ‘slain/ ‘rive V ‘come !* 
‘why fliest 7 And, dark-hued, the Rakshasas, equipped in 
golden mail, in that deep darkness appeared like elevated 
hills clad with woods of flaming medicinal herbs. And in 
that limitless gloom, the Rakshasas, transported with wrath, 
advanced with impetuous speed, devouring monkeys. And, 
fired with terrible wrath, thev,t bounding up, with their sharp 
teeth tore up steeds caparisoned in gold, and standards 
resembling venomous serpents. And the lusty monkeys in 
battle agitated the Rikshasa host, — and, waxing furious, with 



* Spectres having bodies without heads. 

t This was because, as intelligently remarks Rdmdnuja, night-rangers 
grow powerful at night. — T. 

t i. e. the monkeys, as appears from the context. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1230 



KAa/A VAN A. 



their teeth pulled and bit elephants and the riders thereof, 
and cars furnished' with flags and standards. And R£ma and 
Lakshmana with shafts resembling venomous serpents, 
slaughtered the foremost among the Rakshasas — both those 
that were seen and those that were not. — And the dust of 
the earth arising from warring combatants, and from the 
hoofs of horses and the wheels of cars, choked up eye and 
ear. And as the mighty encounter, capable of making 
people’s hair stand on end, went on, there flowed a fearful 
river of gore. And the sounds of kettle-drums and 

Mridangas and Panavas , mingled with those of conchs and 
car-wheels,— were wonderful (to hear). And the sounds of 
steeds neighing, and R&kshasas (roaring), and monkeys, 
rejoicing; — w6re something tremendous. And, with able 
monkeys slain ; and darts and javelins and axes; and 
slaughtered R&kshasas wearing forms at pleasure, lying 
mountain-like, — the field of battle, seeming to have offerings 
of arms representing flowers, — became difficult to recog- 
nise, and inaccessible ; and the earth was drenched with 
streams of blood. And that Night, destructive to monkeys and 
Rakshasas, — was dreadful, and difficult of being out-sped 
by all, — like unto the Fatal Night of beings. And in that 
profound darkness, the Rlkshasas with great vivacity 
attacked R&ma with a shower of shafts. And the roars of 
those beings as they advanced, sending up shouts in anger, 
resembled the dashing of the Ocean at the time of the 
universal dissolution. And in the twinkling of an eye, Rama 
by means of six shafts resembling tongues of flames, 
struck six of the night-rangers; viz ., Yajnagatru, irrepressible 
(in fight), — and MahSparcwa, and Mahodara, and the huge- 
bodied Vajradanashtra, — and those two — Suka and S&rana. 
And, pierced in their vitals with Rama’s shafts, they, having 
only their lives left to them, disappeared from the field. Then 
in the twinkling of an eye, that MahSratha rendered all sides 
clear (of all gloom) by means of arrows resembling tongues 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YVDDHAKXNDAM . 



1 * 3 * 

of fire ; and those other heroic R&kshasas that were in front 
of R§ma, were destroyed on approaching the place, like 
insects approaching a fire. And with shafts plated with 
gold lying in all directions, the night resembled one in 
autumn decked with fire-flies. And in consequence of the 
uproar occasioned by the Rakshasas, and the sounds of 
drums, that night, already dreadful (in itself), became all the 
more so. And on that sound attaining dimensions on all 
sides, it seemed as if the mount Trikuta, containing numerous 
caverns, had been speaking. And huge-bodied Golangulas 
of equal lustre with darkness itself,* binding fast the 
night-rangers with their arms, began to swallow them up. 
And Angada was present in the encounter, for slaying foes. 
And Indrajit, fairing sadly at the hands of Angada, abondon- 
ing his vehicle, and having his horses as well as his charioteer 
slain, vanished then and there. And that feat of Vali's 
son, worthy of being honored, all the celestials with the 
saints and both Rama and Lakshmana lauded to the 
height. All beings were acquainted with the might of 
Indrajit in battle; and, therefore, witnessing his discomfiture, 
and seeing that high-souled one, they rejoiced exceedingly. 
And, seeing the enemy vanquished, all the. monkeys with 
Sugriva and Bibhishana, experiencing high delight, exclaimed, 
— “Excellent j” “Excellent !“ And, beaten by Vali’s son 
of dreadful deeds, Indrajit was fired with a mighty wrath. 
And, being handled hard in battle, and having vanished from 
the field, the heroic and wicked son of R&vana, who had 
received a boon from Brahm&, transported with passion,— 
remaining invisible, began to discharge sharpened shafts 
of the splendour of the thunder-bolt. And worked up into 
rage, he in the conflict pierced Raghu’s sons, Rama and 
Lakshmana all over their bodies, with terrific arrows 
consisting of serpents. And himself engirt with illusion, that 
night-ranger, given to fighting in crooked ways, — remaining 

* Irony. 



"Digitized by L-ooQle 




RkMAVANA . 



1232 

invisible to all creatures,— stupified the descendants of 
Raghu in battle ; and by means of his shafts bound the 
brothers, R&ma and Lakshmana. And then in the sight of 
the monkeys, those heroes and foremost of men were suddenly 
overpowered with shafts by the enraged (Indrajit). And 
when the son of the R&kshasa monarch felt himself in- 
competent to cope with them* openly, then that impious one, 
resorting to illusion, bound those princes (by that means). 



SECTION X L V . 



Then, anxious to ascertain hist course, the king’s 
son possessed of prowess, and endowed with exceeding 
strength, R£ma, ordered ten of the monkey-leaders. And 
that repressor of foes ordered Vali’s son — Angada, the 
vigorous Sarabha, Dwivida, Hanuman, the mighty Sinupras- 
tha, Rishabha and Rishabhaskandha. Thereat with alacrity 
those monkeys, weilding mighty trees, shot up into the sky, 
and began to scour the ten cardinal points. And Rivana’s 
son, skilled in arms, resisted the impetuous march of those 
vehement ones by means of a powerful weapon as well as 
arms more forceful (than the force of their rush). And the 
exceedingly vehement monkeys, cut and mangled with 
ndrdchas , saw him in the dark like the sun enveloped in 
clouds. And that conquerer in battle, R&vana’s son, with 
shafts sorely pierced the persons of R&ma and Lakshmana. 
And both Rama and Lakshmana had their bodies entirely 
covered by the angry Indrajit with shafts turned into serpents. 
And from their wounds blood began to gush out in streams ; 

* Kima and Lakshmana. 

t Indrajit’s. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




r UDDHA KXNDA M. 



1233 



and they looked like flower-crowned Kingukas . Then that 
one having red corners unto his eyes and resembling a mass 
of crushed collyrium, R&vana’s son, said unto the brothers, 
as he vanished, — “When I fight remaining invisible, even 
Sakra — the lord of the celestials — cannot see or approach 
me, — and who are ye ? And I, with my soul surcharged with 
wrath, shall, assailing them with showers of weapons 
furnished with Kanka feathers, send Raghu’s sons to the 
abode of Yama.” Having spoken thus unto the brothers — 
Rama and Lakshmana, cognizant of righteousness — (Indrajit) 
— pierced them with sharpened shafts, and shouted in joy. 
And stretching his large bow, that one sable like unto a mass 
of crushed collyrium again discharged terrific shafts in 
battle. And that one versed in the inner sense of things, 
with whetted arrows pierced the vitals of Rama and 
Lakshmana and shouted momentarily. And fast bound by 
the shackles of shafts on the edge of battle, they* could not 
attain respite for a moment. Then with their persons 
pierced with shafts and darts, and resembling the flags of the 
Great Indra let loose from the cords and trembling (in the 
air), — and with their bodies bristling with arrows, — those 
heroes and mighty bowmen — lords of the earth — tormented 
in consequence of their vitals having been pierced, dropped 
down to the earth. And those heroes, bathed in blood, and 
their persons covered with arrows, — pained and suffering 
terribly, lay down as became heroes. And there was not so 
much room unpierced in their persons as could be measured 
by a finger; and they were wounded with arrows up to the 
fore-parts of their hands.f And they being wounded by that 
fell one capable of assuming shapes at will, blood violently 
gushed out of their bodies like water from a spring. And Rama 
fell first, pierced in the vitals with the shafts. And the same 

* i. e. R&ma and Lakshmana. 

f This sloka is rather obscure, and the Bengali translators have convenient- 
ly passed it by 1 — T. 

*55 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1234 



RAM At ANa. 



Indrajit who had formerly wrathfully routed Sakra.(now) pierc- 
ed (R&ma) with ndrdchas knotted with gold,and having polish- 
ed heads; swift-speeding; and resembling dust carried about by 
the wind ; and \\&U-ndrdchas ; and darts resembling anjalis ;* 
and vatsadantas ;t and sinhadanshtras ;% and razors ; and, 
resigning his stringless bow decked in gold and curved in 
three places, — with its part for grasping shattered — he§ lay 
down like a hero. And seeing Rama — foremost of men — 
down within arrow-range, Lakshmana despaired of his life. 
And seeing his brother, Rama, having eyes resembling lotus- 
petals and ever delighting in battle, himself the refuge of 
others, — lying down in the field ; (Lakshmana) began to weep. 
And the monkeys also, seeing him, were plunged in sorrow ; 
and they, their eyes flooded with tears, began to cry in 
grief of heart. And when they had been bound and had laid 
themselves down as become heroes, the monkeys stood 
around them, — and, conversing with one another, they, 
headed by the son of the Wind, were seized with extreme 
sorrow. 



SECTION X L V I . 



A.ND the rangers of woods, gazing at the earth and the 
sky, at length cast their eyes on the brothers — Rama and 
Lakshmana: covered all over with arrows. And after that 
R&kshasa had gone away having performed his work, like 
the God || going away, after having showered, — there came 

♦ The hands joined at the lower sides, with the palms hollowed. — T. 
f Weapons resembling the teeth of a calf. 
t Weapons resembling the lion’s teeth 
$ R&ma. 
ii Indra. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





FUDDHA RIlNDAM. 



1235 



to that place Bibhishana with Sugriva. And, mourning 
Raghu's sons, there also came in all haste Nila and Dwivida 
and Mainda and Sushena and Kumuda and Angada in 
company with Hanuman. And moveless ; breathing low ; — 
covered with blood, — pierced all over with net-works of 
shafts ; dumb ; they* were lying on the field. And they were 
sighing like serpents ; and were inert ; and deprived of 
prowess ; and washed in blood \ and looking like unto golden 
standards. And as they lay moveless, as become heroes, the 
leaders of monkeys environed them with tear-charged eyes. 
And seeing the sons of Raghu lying, covered with showers 
of shafts, the monkeys, with Bibhishana, were pained 
(exceedingly). And the monkeys, surveying the sky as well 
as all directions, could not see Ravana's son in battle 
enveloped with illusion. And then Bibhishana by means of 
illusion saw his brother's son staying before, hidden by 
illusion. And Bibhishana saw that hero of incomparable 
deeds, who had no compeer in the field and who had energy, 
fame and prowess, — as he remained invisible in consequence 
of the boon received from Brahma. And Indrajit, seeing his 
own feat and them lying at length, spake in excess of joy, 
gladdening all the Rakshasas, — “The brothers — Rama and 
Lakshmana, possessed of great strength, who had slain Khara 
and Dushana, are themselves slain with my shafts. And all 
the celestials and Asuras assembled together with the saints, 
are incompetent to emancipate these from the fetters of my 
shafts. He for whom my father was exercised with anxiety 
and tormented by grief, for whom my sire used to spend 
nights without pressing his bed, — for whom this entire Lanka 
had resembled a river turbulent in the rainy reason, — that 
same evil sticking by the root of all, hath been dispensed his 
quietus by me. And like clouds of autumn, the prowess of 
Rima and Lakshmana as well as that of all the rangers of 
the w oods, hath been rendered useless." Saying this in 
* R&ma and Lakshmana. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





236 



RlMlVANA. 



the presence of all the RSkshasas, RSvana’s son — destroyer 
of foes — menacing the monkey-leaders, hit Nila with nine 
arrows, and hurt Mainda and Dwivida each with three power- 
ful shafts. And piercing Jambavan with an arrow in the 
chest, that mighty bowman discharged ten at HanumSLn. 
And RSvana's son possessed of exceeding impetuosity, 
pierced in the conflict with two shafts each GavSksha and 
Sarabha of immeasurable vigor. And RSvana’s son, summon- 
ing celerity, pierced the king of Golangulas and VSdi’s son, 
Angada, with innumerable arrows. And the powerful son 
of Ravana, endowed with might, piercing the foremost 
monkeys with shafts resembling tongues of flames, set up 
shouts in the field of battle. And tormenting the monkeys 
with volleys of shafts and striking terror into them, that 
mighty-armed one, bursting out into a laugh, said, — “Let the 
Rakshasas behold these brothers, lying fast bound with 
dreadful arrows in front of the forces.” Thus addressed, 
those Rakshasas— wily warriors all — resembling masses of 
clouds, witnessing that deed (of Indrajit), struck with 
wonder and rejoicing (greatly), set up tremendous roars. 
And thinking that Rama was slain, they honored Ravana's 
son. And seeing the brothers — Rama and Lakshniana — 
motionless, and lying inert on the ground, — they took them 
for slain. And, experiencing excess of joy, Indrajit— 
conquerer in conflict — entered the city of Lanka, rejoicing 
all the Nairitas. Seeing the bodies as well as the limbs of 
R&ma and Lakshmana, covered entirely with arrows, fear 
took possession of Sugriva. Thereat Bibhishana said unto 
that lord of monkeys, staying in woe-begone guise, with a 
tearful countenance, and his eyes wild with wrath, — “Do not 
give way to fear, O Sugriva. Restrain thy rising tears ! 
This is the way of warfare : victory is not (always) sure. 
But, O hero, if Fortune ultimately smile upon us, this stupor 
shall go off from these high-souled and exceedingly powerful 
ones. Therefore, O monkey, do thou cheer me, who am 



Digitized by L,ooQle 




y uddha k And am : 



,2 37 

forlorn/’ Saying this, with his hand Bibhishana washed 
Sugriva’s graceful eyes with water. And taking water, 
the righteous Bibhishana by means of his knowledge, 
washed Sugriva’s eyes therewith. And washing the face of 
the intelligent monkey-monarch, Bibhishana spoke these 
words, seasonable and sedate, — “O foremost of monkey kings, 
this is no time for being overcome with stupor. At this 
hour, even immoderate affection may lead to destruction. 
Therefore, casting off stupor, which tends to mar all work, 
do thou bethink thee how thou mayst serve this army headed 
by Rama. Or do thou protect Rama so long as he doth not 
regain consciousness j and when the KSkutsthas shall have 
regained consciousness, all our apprehension shall vanish. 
This is nothing to R&ma, and Rama is not dying. And 
Lakshmi,* who is incapable of being attained by those that 
are doomed, shall not forsake this one. Therefore do thou 
comfort thyself, do thou also cheer up thy own forces,— 
while I am engaged in composing all the troops. O best of 
monkeys, these with distended eyes, come under the 
governance of terror, are, stricken with panic, whispering 
into each other’s ears. But seeing me, let the forces rushing 
about, cheered up, — as well as the monkeys, — cast off all 
fear, like a wreath that hath been used before/’ Thus 
comforting Sugriva, Bibhishana — lord of R&kshasas — again 
instilled spirits into the flying forces of monkeys. And 
Indrajit — worker of mighty illusions — accompanied by his 
troops, entered the city of Lank& and presented himself 
before his father. And approaching Ravana and saluting 
him with joined hands, he informed his sire of the welcome 
tidings that R&ma and Lakshmana had been slain. And 
hearing that his foe had fallen, R&vana springing up in the 
midst of the R&kshasas, with great joy embraced his son. 
And scenting the crown of his head, (Ravana) with a delight- 
ed heart, asked (Indrajit as to all that had taken place). And 
* The goddess of prosperity. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





RAM A YANA . 



1238 

on being asked, be dndrajit) truly related unto his sire how 
(Rlma and Lakshmana) bad been rendered senseless and 
lack-lustre by being fastened with shafts. Thereat, with 
rapture - surcharging his inmost soul, RSvana, hearing the 
speech of the mighty car- warrior, * banished his fear of 
Dagaratha’s son, — and rising up, honored his son with glad 
words. 



SECTION XUVIt. 



AV^EN Ravana’s son entered LankS, after having 
accomplished his purpose, the foremost monkeys protected 
R5ghava, surrounding him on all sides. And HanumStn, 
and Angada, and Nila, and Sushena, and Kumuda, and Nala, 
and Gaya, and GavSksha, and Panasa, and Samprastha — a 
mighty monkey — and JambavSn, and Rishava, and Sunda, 
and Rambha, and Satavali, and Prilhu, — all forming them- 
selves into array, and equipped with trees on all sides, and 
remaining vigilant, — the monkeys kept gazing at all side3, 
awry and upwards ; and even when a straw stirred, they 
thought it to be a Rakshasa. And RSLvana, on his part, 
experiencing the height of exaltation, summoned the 
RSLkshasis engaged in guarding SitJL. — And thereat the 
R&kshasis — Trijata and others — presented themselves at 
his command. And then the lord of R&kshasas, delighted, 
addressed then the Rakshasis, saying, — “Tell Vaidehi that 
R3ma and Lakshmana have been slain in battle by Indrajit. 
And taking her on Pushaka, show her (R2ma and Lakshmana) 
lying slain on the field of battle. That one depending on 
whom she had proudly set her face against me, — that 
husband of hers, along with his brother, hath been slain in 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




Yt/DDHA KIND am. 



12 39 

Conflict. And then 'Mithila’s daughter, her fear gone off 
with her anxiety, and herself losing all support, — Sita — 
daughter unto Mithila — decked out in all ornaments, shall 
seek me. And today beholding Rama with Lakshmana, 
come under the sway of Time, she, finding no other way, 
shall desist from her present course. And seeing no other 
resourse, that one of expansive eyes shall of herself seek 
me.” Hearing those words of the wicked-minded R&vana, 
the Rakshasis, saying, — “So be it,” — went • to where 
Pushpaka was. Then taking Pushpaka, the Rakshasis at 
Ravana’s command went to Maithili staying in the agoka 
wood. Then, taking Sita, who was overcome with grief for 
her lord, the Rakshasis, placed her on the car, Pushpaka. 
And placing Sita on Pushpaka along with Trijata, Ravana 
took her all around (Lanka) crowded with ensigns and 
standards. And the lord of Rakshasas jubilantly proclaim- 
ed iu Lanka, — “R&ghava as well as Lakshmana have been 
slain by Indrajit in battle/" And going about with Trijata, 
Sita saw all the monkey-troops slain. And she found the 
flesh-eaters elated in spirits, and the monkeys afflicted with 
extreme grief at the side of Rama and Lakshmana. Then 
Sita beheld both Lakshmana and Rama lying in the field, 
senseless and bound with arrows. And those heroes 
were lying on the earth, their mail torn, their bows cast off, 
their bodies mangled all over and thickly pierced with shafts. 
And seeing those brothers, — foremost of heroes and best 
of men — having eyes resembling white lotuses, and them- 
selves like unto Kumaras, — lying in the field,* — the fire- 
sprung one, Sita, striken with grief, began to weep piteously. 
And that black-eyed one of an excellent person, Janaka's 
daughter — seeing them roll in the dust, broke out into 
lamentation. And with her eyes shedding plentiful tears, 

* Virdn nararshabhdn — heroes and best of men — occurs again, — left out on 
the score of redendancy. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1240 



xAajA van a. 



she seeing those brothers, endowed with god-like prowess, 
concluded them to be dead $ and overwhelmed with grief, 
spoke as follows. 



SECTION x L V III. 



j\_ND seeing her husband, as well as the exceedingly 
powerful Lakshmana, — slain, Sita, afflicted with grief, burst 
into bitter lamentation. “The soothsayers had said that I 
should have sons, and should never be a widow. But on 
RSLma being slain, it seems now that those ones, possessed 
of knowledge, had spoken untruthfully. And those also, who 
having celebrated sacrifices and rites, had said that I should 
become the queen (of Rama), — on Rima being slain, seems 
to-day to have spoken a falsehood, although they are 
possessed of knowledge. And they also asserted that I 
should be honored of the wives of heroic kings as well as of 
my lord, — but on Rima being slain, they seem to have uttered 
a falsehood, although possessed of knowledge. And those 
twice-born ones that in my hearing had said auspicious words, 
on Rama being slain, seem to-day to have spoken a falsehood, 
although they were possessed of knowledge. These lotus- 
marks on the feet, betokening unto gentlewomen possessing 
them, that they are to be installed in the kingdom in company 
with their husbands — who are kings, — are on me. And 
those marks find I none on me by which women of rare fortune 
come by widowhood, — but I find that in me these good 
tokens are nullified. Those marks that are pronounced 
infallible by those versed in such knowledge, on RSma being 
slain, are nullified in me. My hairs are fine, equal, and blue ; 
my eye-brows touch each other ) my hips are devoid of down 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




y I ddha kKnda m. 



1 24 1 

and round ; and my teeth are close. My temples, and eyes, 
hands, feet, ankles, and thighs are equal. And my fingers are 
furnished with round nails, and are plump and even in the 
middle. And my breasts are close and firm and developed, 
and have their nipples sunk. And my navel is depressed, 
with high sides. And my chest is swelling. And my 
complexion is like the hue of gems, — and my down soft. 
And they said that I was furnished with twelve auspicious 
signs. And my hands in the middle parts of my fingers 
contain wheat-marks ; and in the spaces between the fingers, 
have no uneven corners. And my feet also partake of the 
general complexion. And my laugh is a gentle smile. And 
those versed in marks of women knew that I was 
possessed of such marks. And those Brahmanas skilled 
in telling fortune said that I should be installed in the 
kingdom along with my husband ; but all that hath been 
falsified. Having purified JanasthSna (of R&kshasas), obtained 
tidings of me, and crossed the Ocean* incapable of being 
agitated, those brothers have been slain in the footprint of a 
cow! The descendants of Raghu had obtained Varuna and 
Agueya and Aindra and Vayava and Brahmagiras weapons.f 
Through illusion have those lords of me, who am forlorn — 
Rama and Lakshmana, resembling VS.sava himself in battle,— 
been slain. Coming in battle within ken of Raghava, a foe, 
even if he be endowed with the fleetness of thought, — doth 
not go back, living. There is nothing which is too hard for 
Time ; and the Destroyer is incapable of being overcome ; 
inasmuch as R2Lma along with his brother Lakshmana hath 
fallen in fight. And I do not so much mourn R&ma or the 
mighty car-warrior — Lakshmana— or, for that matter, self, — 
as I do the wretched Mother-in-law of mine. She ever 
thinketh of the period of the promise. ‘When shall I behold 

* The commentator assigns a metaphorical sense to ocean , but this is 
hardly necessary. 

f And did they not remember this now ?’ completes the sense. T. 

*S 6 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1242 



RAMA) 'ANA. 



Sita and Lakshmana with Raghava ?”' As she was thus 
lamenting, the R&kshasi, Trijata, said, — “O exalted lady, 
do not weep thus. Thy lord liveth. And, O dignified one, 
I shall unfold unto thee potent and probable reasons why the 
brothers Rama and Lakshmana live. When their leader 
falleth, the countenances of the warriors in battle are not 
overspread with passion, or display cheerfulness and vivacity. 
And, O Vaidehi, if those had lost their lives, this celestial 
chariot, named Pushpaka, would not have held thee. An 
army that hath its heroes and chiefs slain — becoming dispirit- 
ed and drooping, rangeth the field, like a vessel on water that 
hath lost its helmsman. But, O lorn one, these troops, be- 
traying neither agitation nor anxiety,, are guarding the 
Kakutsthas. This I tell thee of them out of affection. Do 
thou, at this conclusion bringing in joy, take comfort; and 
behold the Kakutsthas unslain. This I tell thee from affection. 

I never told thee untruths heretofore; nor, O Mithila’s 
daughter, will I tell them unto thee now. Thou by virtue 
of thy character conducive to delight, hast found an acess 
into my heart. These even the celestials and Asuras with 
Indra (at their head) are incompetent to quell. Seeing 
such sight, I speak to thee as to their being alive. And 
behold, O Maithili, this mighty wonder ! These are lying 
insensible with arrows ; but of these Grace hath not taken 
leave. It generally happens that the faces of persons dead 
and gone, are unsightly to a degree. Therefore, O Janaka's 
daughter, leave off grief and sorrow and stupor. For the 
sake of Rama and Lakshmana thou canst not today put a 
period to tiiy existence.” Hearing her words, Mithila’s 
daughter — Sita — resembling the daughter of a celestial, with 
hands joined, said, — “May this be so !” Then turning 
away the car Pushpaka fleet as the mind, the distressed 
Sita entered Lanka along with Trijata. Then in company 
with Trijata, alighting from Pushpaka, she along with the 
Rakshasis entered the agoka wood. And entering that 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




YUS>DHAKlNDAM 



*243 



sporting-ground of the Rakshasa lord abounding in woody 
tracts, Sita, having beheld those princes and reflected on 
them, became subject to a mighty grief. 



SECTION X l i x . 



‘Round up terribly with shafts, Dagaratha’s sons, lying 
down bathed in blood, sighed hard like unto serpents. And 
all those foremost monkeys, along with Sugriva, possessed 
of exceeding strength, — overwhelmed with sorrow, remained 
surrounding those high-souled ones. In the meanwhile, the 
powerful Rama, albeit fast bound by the shafts, awoke by 
virtue of the exceeding toughness of his person, as well as 
his might. Then, seeing his brother, having a distressful 
countenance, covered with blood, feeble, and fast bound by 
the shafts, — R&ma, greatly aggrieved, began to mourn. “Of 
what use unto me is the recovery of Sita, or life either, 
when to-day I see my brother vanquished in fight and lying 
down in the field ? Seeking in the world (of men), I may 
light upon a woman like SitS. ; but never on a brother, or a 
helper, or a warrior like unto Lakshmana. If that enhancer 
of Sumitra’s joy have met with his end, my life I must 
renounce in the sight of the monkeys. What shall I say unto 
Kaugalya ; and what shall I say unto Kaikeyi ? And what 
shall I say unto mother Sumitra, eager for a sight of her son ? 
And if I go (back) without him, how shall I soothe her, like 
unto a cow reft of her calf ; and trembling ; and resembling 
a mourning Kurari ? And how shall I say unto Satrughana 
and the illustrious Bharata, — ‘He went with me to the forest ; 
but I come (back) here without him ?' I shall not be able to 
bear the rebuke of mother Sumitra. Therefore even here 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




*244 



RAmAVaNA 



shall I renounce my person ; for certainly I dare not live. 
Fie on me, who am wicked and base ; for me this Lakshmana, 
brought down, lieth in the field of battle, like one that is 
without life. O Lakshmana, thou ever comfortest me when 
I am dispirited. But to day, having lost thy life, thou canst 
not speak to me, who am afflicted. Thou, O hero, who hadst in 
battle slain innumerable Rakshasas lying around, hast (at 
length) thyself been slain in the field with shafts. And 
lying down in the battle-field, bleeding, and covered with 
arrows, thou appearest like the Sun when he hath gone up the 
Setting-hill. And in consequence of shafts piercing thy 
vitals, thou canst not speak ; but thy visible expression, 
albeit thou art dumb, betokens pain. O thou endowed with 
exceeding splendour, even as thou didst follow me into the 
forest, will I follow thee unto the mansion of Yama. Thou, 
having dear friends, and ever following me, hast come by 
this plight in consequence of my reprehensible conduct. 1 
do not remember having heard any harsh speech from the 
heroic Lakshmana, even when he had happened to be 
exceedingly wroth. He that could discharge at one shot five 
hundred shafts, — that Lakshmana is superior to Karttaviryya 
himself in that weapon — the bow. He that with his arms 
could resist the arms of Sakra himself, — that one worthy of 
a costly couch — lieth down on the ground, slain. And that 
false babble shall now, without doubt, consume me ; for by me 
hath not Bibhishana been made monarch of the Rakshasas. 
Do thou, O Sugriva, this very moment retrace thy steps. 
Bereft of thy strength through me, thou wilt be worsted by 
Ravana. And, O Sugriva, placing Angada to the fore, do 
thou, taking thy host as well as the equipage, in 
company with Nila and Nala, cross over the Ocean. By 
thee hath been achieved a mighty feat incapable of being 
done by another in battle. And pleased am I with the king 
of bears, and the lord of Golangulas ; and Angada hath quit 
himself nobly, as also Mainda and Dwivida. And Ke^arin 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




rUDnHAKANDAM. 



1245 



and SampSti have both faught terribly. And Gavaya, and 
GavSksha, and Sarabha, and Gaja, — and other monkeys 
have faught as others are incapable of fighting, — determined 
to lay down their lives (for me). But, 0 Sugriva, man 
cannot overrule Destiny. Thou, my friend, fearing righte- 
ousness,* hast done what lay in thy power. And, Ye 
foremost of monkeys, ye also have acted as becometh friends. 
Now, with my permission, go ye whithersoever ye are 
minded. 1 ’ Hearing Rima’s lament, the monkeys — those 
dark-eyed and others— began to shed tears from their eyes. 
Then Bibhishana, quieting the army, taking a mace in his 
hand, swiftly went to where Righava was. And seeing him 
fast making his way, resembling a mass of dark collyrium, 
the monkeys taking him to be Ravana’s son,+ began to run 
away. 



SECTION L. 



Then out spake the highly energetic and exceedingly 
mighty king of monkeys, — “Why is this host agitated like 
a bark driven hither and thither by the wind ?” Hearing 
Sugriva’ s speech, Vali’s son said, — “Dost thou not see both 
those heroes — sons of Da9aratha — R&ma and that mighty 
car-warrior — Lakshmana — covered with arrows? And (dost 
thou not see) those high-sould ones lying in the field of 
battle, covered with blood ?” Thereat, the lord of monkeys, 
Sugriva, spake unto his son,} Angada — “ 1 do not deem it 

* Dharma-bhiru— fearing righteousness — is the epithet generally applied to 
persons fearing not in fact righteousness , but unrighteousness. This may be 
taken as an idiotism in Sanskrit.- — T. 

t Indrajit. Such was the fear he had spread by his redoubtable deeds 1— T. 

% His step-son , for Sugriva had married Angada's father's wife, after Rirna 
had slain Vdli in KishkindhA. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



RAmAI'AIV.* . 



1 246 

without cause. This may have come to pass through sheer 
fear. These monkeys with sad faces, leaving their arms 
behind them, are flying in all directions, their eyes distended 
in affright. And they are not ashamed of each other, and 
they do not cast their looks back. And they hug each other, 
and go leaping over the fallen.” In the meanwhile, that 
hero, Bibhishana, bearing a mace in his hand, (approaching), 
greeted Sugriva as well as Raghava with blessings of victory. 
And Sugriva, seeing Bibhishana, capable of inspiring fear 
in the monkeys, spoke unto the higlvsouled sovereign of 
bears, who stood by, — “This is Bibhishana that hath come 
hither, seeing whom the foremost among the monkeys, from 
fear of Ravana’s son who, they apprehend, he is, — are fleeing 
away, seized with a panic. Do thou at once stay these agitated 
with fear and scampering all around; and proclaim, — ‘This 
is Bibhishana , who hath come here.”’ Thus directed, 
Jambavan — king of bears — restraining those that were 
flying, composed the monkeys. Hearing the bear-king’s 
words, and seeing Bibhishana, the monkeys, renouncing 
fear, desisted (from their flight). Then the righteous 
Bibhishana, viewing Rama’s as well as Lakshmana’s body 
pierced with arrows, was exceedingly aggrieved. And wash- 
ing their eyes with water, he, with his mind overpowered 
with grief, began to weep and broke out into lamentation, — 
“ The Rakshasas, fighting in wily ways, have brought to this 
pass these ones endowed with prowess and possessed 
of every perfection and gifted with might (of arm). And 
with his guileful mind, that brother’s son of mine, wicfeed- 
souled and an evil son (unto me), — hath deceived these ones 
of straight prowess. Pierced with innumerable shafts, and 
covered with blood, these are lying on the ground like 
Salyakas*. Those depending on whose prowess, I had 
sought eminence, those foremost of men, sleep here soundly 
for renouncing their bodies. Living, today I am in distress : 

* A tree. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




fcddhakAadam. 



247 



and my desire of dominion is annihilated ; and my foe, 
Havana, hath his promise fulfilled and his aim crowned with 
success. ” As Bibhishana was thus lamenting, the lord of 
monkeys — Sugriva — endowed with strength, embracing him, 
spoke unto him, — “O thou cognisant of righteousness, thou 
wilt herein Lanka obtain empire: no doubt of this ; and 
Havana along with his sons will be disappointed in their 
expectations. Both these — Rama and Lakshmana — are 
under the aegis of Garura ; and, casting off their stupor: they 
will in battle slay Havana along with his adherents.” Hav- 
ing thus soothed and comforted the Rakshasa, Sugriva 
addressed his father-in law, who was at his side, saying, — 
“ Do thou along with numbers of heroic monkeys, taking 
those repressors of foes, the brothers— Rama and Lakshmana 
— when they shall have regained their consciousness, repair 
to Kishkindha. And I, slaying Ravana along with his sons 
and friends, shall bring back Mithila’s daughter, even as 
Sakra recovered the lost Sri.” Hearing the words of the 
monkey-king, Sushena said, — “I had witnessed the war of 
yore between the gods and the Asuras. Then the Danavas, 
enveloping themselves, momentarily destroyed the deities, 
albeit versed in arms and accomplished in weapons. And 
they, their senses lost, and their lives departed, Vrihashpati 
treated by means of his knowledge of mantras , as well with 
medicines. Let Sampati, Panasa, and other monkeys 
speedily hie to the Milky Ocean for the purpose of bringing 
those medicines. And the monkeys well know that mighty 
mountainous medicine — divine and capable of reviving the 
dead, — and made by the deities themselves — vigalya. There 
are (the mountains) named Chandra and Drona : where 
the ambrosia was churned, there is that supreme drug. And 
those mountains have been placed by the deities in the- mighty 
deep. And, O king, let the son of the Wind-god go thither.” 
In the meanwhile, the wind arose, and masses of clouds 
appeared along with lightning. And the wind blew, agitating 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




248 



rAmKvana. 



the waters of the deep, and shaking the mountains. And 
mighty trees of the ocean-islands, broken down by the 
terrible wing-raised wind, began to topple head- 
long into the salt waters. And the serpents dwelling 
there were seized with affright ; and speedily all the aquatic 
animals dived deep into the salt sea. And then in a moment 
the monkeys saw Vinata’s son, possessed of terrific strength, — 
like unto a flaming fire. And seeing him come, the serpents 
began to dart away, — those exceedingly powerful ones that, 
turning into shafts, had bound those persons* Then, touching 
the KUkutsthas and saluting them, Suparna rubbed with his 
hands their countenances furnished with the splendour of the 
Moon. And their wounds, on being touched by Vinata's son, 
were (immediately) healed ; and the bodies of both speedily 
became cool and shone with an excellent complexion. And 
they attained immense energy and prowess ; and a double 
share of strength, and of rational and perceptive powers, and 
of memory. And then raising them up, the exceedingly 
energetic Garura, resembling Vasava himself, embraced both 
joyfully. And then Rama addressed (Garura), saying, — “By 
thy grace we have through means survived the mighty 
calamity that had sprung from Ravana's son ; and we have 
also speedily been rendered strong. And my heart is 
delighted on having thee, like unto my father, Da^aratha, or 
my grand sire, Aja. Who art thou, furnished with beauty, 
and bearing wreaths and unguents (on thy person) ; clad m 
stainless attire ; and adorned in noble ornaments ?” Unto 
him spake the exceedingly energetic son of VinatS, endowed 
with great strength, — the lord of birds, with a pleased heart, 
and his eyes wild with glee, — “O K&kutstha, I am thy 
friend — thy life ranging externally — Garutman. I am come 
hither for aiding you. Neither the highly powerful Asuras, nor 
the exceedingly strong monkeys, nor the celestials along with 
the Gandharbas, having him of an hundred sacrifices at their 
* R&ma and Lakshmana. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





rXJDDHA KiNDA M. 



1249 



head are, — capable of delivering ( any one ) from these 
dreadful arrowy bonds, which had been forged by Indrajit 
of tortuous deeds by help of illusion. These serpents 
— offspring of Kadru — are sharp-fanged and venomous ; and 
had bound thee as arrows through the potency of illu- 
sion. O Rama having truth for prowess, thou art for- 
tunate, — along with that destroyer of foe in fight, Laksh- 
mana. Hearing this, I, summoning energy, have come 
hither swiftly. And I, doing by thee as a friend, have from 
affection at once set you free from these dreadful arrowy 
bonds. But thou shouldst always be on thy guard. By nature 
the Rakshasas have cunning shifts in fight and thou, who art 
heroic and of a pure spirit, canst but rely on thy simplicity 
alone for strength. Therefore thou must not trust the 
Rakshasas in the field of battle. By this one instance (thou 
must know) that Rakshasas are ever deceitful in fight.” 
Having said this, the wondrous mighty Suparna, embracing 
Rama) tenderly (again), said, — “My friend Rfighava, O thou 
who even cherishest affection for thy foes, permit me thou. 
I shall go at pleasure. And, O RSLghava, entertain no 
curiosity as to our friendship.* When, O hero, thou shalt 
have achieved success in battle, thou shalt know all about 
this friendship of ours. And with the surges of thy shafts, 
making Lanka contain only children and aged, and slaying 
thy foe, Rivana, thou shalt recover Sita.” Having spoken 
thus, Suparna, endowed with fleet vigor, having rendered 
Rama hale in the midst of the monkeys, — having gone round 
them and embraced them also, — that one possessed of 
prowess, — set out, covering up the sky, like unto the wind. 
And seeing Raghu’s sons rendered hale, the monkey-leaders 
set up leonine roars, and began to flourish their tails. And 
then beat the kettle-drums and the drums struck up. And 
conchs were cheerfully blown ; and shouts were sent. And 
others struck at their arms with their hands. And the 

* i. e. how it happened. 

1 57 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




250 



RllU&rANA. 



monkeys, accustomed to battle with trees, uprooting them, 
stood by hundreds and thousands. And emitting tremendous 
roars and thereby frightening the night-rangers, the monkeys, 
eager for encounter, approached the gate of Lank§. And 
that mighty and dreadful din raised by the monkeys, 
resembled the terrible rumbling of the clouds at midnight 
about the end of Summer. 



SECTION LI. 



Then RlLvana heard the tumult raised by the highly 
energetic monkeys roaring in company with the R&kshasas. 
And hearing that low and solemn noise — that prodigious 
uproar — R&vana said in the midst of his counsellors, — “From 
mighty roars that are heard of in innumerous delighted 
monkeys, — resembling the roar of clouds, — it is evident, 
beyond a doubt, that there is great rejoicing there. And the 
salt Ocean is vexed with these thundering noises. The 
brothers — R5ma and Lakshmana — have been fast bound with 
sharp shafts j and here this uproar is exciting my alarm.” 
Having spoken thus unto his ministers, the lord of the 
Rakshasas addressed the Nairitas present there, saying, — 
“Do you speedily acquaint yourselves with the cause of 
rejoicing that hath arisen of these monkeys on this mournful 
occasion.” Thus accosted, they hurriedly mounting up on 
the wall, surveyed the forces maintained by the high-souled 
Sugriva as well as those exalted ones — Raghu's sons— 
emancipated from their terrific arrowy fetters and arisen 
(now).” Thereat, with their hearts wrought up, grim-visaged 
R&kshasas descending from the wall, appeared before the 
Rakshasa-lord with pale faces. And then with woe-begone 



Digitized by 




TUDDHAKXNDAM. 



1251 



faces, those RSkshasas, skilled in speech, faithfully informed 
R§vana in full of that unfortunate circumstance. ‘‘Those 
brothers — R£ma and Lakshmana — who had in battle been 
bound up in arrowy fetters by Indrajit, — and whose arms 
lay moveless, — having been emancipated from the arrowy 
bonds, are seen in the field of battle ; and those ones like unto 
the foremost of elephants in strength, seem like elephants 
that have snapped their fetters.” Hearing those words of 
theirs, the exeedingly powerful lord of the R£kshasas was 
wrought up with anxiety and anger, and his countenance lost 
its complexion. “Indrajit, having Touted them in conflict, 
had bound them by means of irrisistible and terrible arrows, 
resembling venomous serpents, and like unto the Sun 
himself,— which had been conferred on (Indrajit) as boons. 
But if my enemy, having actually been bound by the weapons, 
can have been liberated, all this strength of mine I see placed 
in peril. And those shafts resembling Fire in fierceness, 
which had in battle deprived my foes of their lives,— have 
forsooth been rendered fruitless.” Having said this in high 
rage, RSvana, sighing like a serpent, addressed a RSkshasa, 
named Dhumr&ksha, seated in the midst of the Rikshasas,— 
“O thou ef dreadful prowess, surrounded by a mighty force, 
do thou march forth to compass the destruction of RSma 
along with the monkeys.” Thus accosted by the intelligent 
lord of the Rakshasas, DhumrSksha, turning about, issued 
out of the abode of the king. And speedily sallying forth 
from the gate of (Ravana's) residence, he said unto the 
general of the forces,— “Do thou speedily move off thy 
forces. Why should a warrior linger ?” Hearing DhumrSksha's 
words, the general of the forces, following them, at the 
command of RSLvana forthwith made the army ready. And 
those powerful and dreadful night-rangers, bursting with 
high spirits,— with bells tied to their arms,— set up shouts, 
and surrounded DhumrSksha. And bearing various weapons 
in their hands, and wielding darts and clubs, and 



Digitized by 




RlMlYANA. 



n 5 * 

equipped with maces and bearded darts and rods and 
iron bludgeons and patighas and. bhindipalas and lances 
and nooses and axes, — those terrific R&kshasas sallied out, 
roaring like unto clouds. And others, accoutred in armour, 
with cars ; adorned with banners ; furnished with golden 
networks, and mules having various faces, and extremely 
swift steeds, and lusty elephants in rut, — tiger-like Nairitas 
incapable of being subdued, even as tigers. — sallied out 
(thereafter). And then DhumrSksha himself ascended a 
superb car, bearing faces of deer and lions decked with 
gold, — and sending forth a loud clatter. And the highly 
powerful DhumrSksha, surrounded by R&kshasas, cheerfully 
issued out of the Western Entrance, where Hanuman was 
posted. And thereat, fell fowls of the air forbade that 
exceedingly dreadful R£kshasa of a fearful form, as he went 
out ascending an excellent car, yoked with mules, and sending 
sharp sounds. And an exceedingly terrific vulture alighted at 
the crest of the car ; and forming themselves into lines, vul- 
tures began to drop down about the top of the banner. And 
emitting a frightful cry, (a headless trunk) dropped down before 
DhumrSksha. And that god* showered down blood ; and the 
earth shook. And the wind blew awry with a sound 
resembling thunder. And every side, covered with darkness, 
appeared dim. And witnessing those dreadful inauspicious 
omens at the outset, fraught with fear unto the Rakshasas, 
Dhumr&ksha was greatly aggrieved ; and the R&kshasas 
marching before him, were stupified. And then as that strong 
and fearful one, eager for encounter, surrounded by in- 
numerable night rangers, issued out (of the city), he beheld 
that monkey-host, protected by the arm of RSghava,— 
resembling the deep at the time of the universal dissolution. 

* Indra — cloud-compeller. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUlODHAKlNDAM 
SECTION Ll I . 



Seeing the R&kshasa — DhumrSksha of dreadful prowess 
— issue out, the monkeys, rejoicing greatly, eager for 
encounter, set up roars. And then there took place a terrific 
conflict between the monkeys and the RSkshasas, charging 
each other with fearful trees, and darts, and maces. And 
the R£kshasas began to scatter the dreadful monkeys on all 
sides ; and the monkeys (on their part) felled the RSkshasas 
with trees. And the R&kshasas, growing enraged, began 
to pierce the monkeys with straight speeding sharp shafts 
winged with Kanka plumes. And riven by the Rakshas 
with dreadful clubs and bearded darts, daggers and maces 
and terrible and curious bludgeons and grasped javelins,— 
the exceedingly powerful (monkeys), their anger aroused, 
began with alacrity to perform deeds of intrepid valour. And 
those monkey-leaders, their bodies pierced jvith shafts and 
their persons riven with darts, took up trees and crags. 
And those monkeys, endowed with terrific vehemence, 
sending up shouts, and proclaiming their respective names, 
set about tossing the brave R&kshasa ranks. And that 
conflict between the Rakshasas and the monkeys, waged 
with diverse rocks and innumerable trees, waxed exceedingly 
furious. And some among the Rakshasas feeding on gore 
— on being agitated by the monkeys burning for victory, — 
began to vomit blood. And some were severed along their 
flanks ; and, some, slain with trees, were heaped up ; and 
some were crushed with crags ; and some were torn with 
teeth. And some being broken down by means of broken 
standards, and some by means of fallen swords, and some 
crushed down by cars, — the rangers of the night suffered 
sorely. And (anon) the earth was covered with huge 
elephants measuring mountains, and mountain-tops, and 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




irJA/J y A N A . 



,*254 

steeds crushed, and the riders thereof,— all borne down by 
the monkeys. And bounding again and again, the vehement 
monkeys endowed with terrific prowess, with their finger- 
nails tore up the RSkshasas by the mouths. And with woe- 
begone faces, and with hair dishevelled, (the R3kshasas), 
stupified with the smell of blood, saught the earth. And 
other R&kshasas endowed with dreadful vigor, waxing 
wond rous wroth, dealt the monkeys slaps with hands having 
the touch of the thunder-bolt. And, gifted with greater 
impetuosity, 4;he monkeys felled the impetuous (R&kshasas) 
with blows, and feet and teeth ; and some were slain with 
trees. And seeing the forces fleeing away, that foremost of 
R&kshasas — Dhumrkksha — flying into fury, began a terrific 
conflict with the monkeys desirous of encounter. And some 
of the monkeys, sore assailed with pragas , began to bleed; 
and some, wounded with maces, dropped down to the 
ground. And some were beaten hard with bludgeons ; and 
some were cleft with bhindipdlas. And some, on being 
assailed with bearded darts, became insensible and lost their 
lives. And some among the monkeys lay slain on the 
ground, drenched in blood. And some, fleeing away from 
the field, were slaughtered by the infuriated RAkshasas. And 
some, having their breasts pierced, lay on their sides. And 
some were riven with tridents ; and the entrails of some 
had come out. And that mighty and dreadful encounter of 
the RAkshasas and the monkeys, was waged with countless 
Weapons and rocks and trees. And that battle hecome a 
musical entertainment* mellifluous with bow-string for Vind , t 
having the neighing of chargers for its measure, and with 

* The reader has already perceived that the carrying out of a simile to 
a number of details is a characteristic as much of Vdlmiki as of his rival in 
the epic sphere— VyAsa. But the comparisons are never on all fours, as in 
the case before us. — T. 

t A classical Hindu musical instrument, having metallic strings, with a 
pair of gourds at one end for the sounding-board. Vide Yantra-Koqa by Sir 
Saurindra Mohan Tagore, Mus-Doc. — T. 



Digitized by 




r UDDHA A AN DA AJ. 



1255 



the cries of Matndas * for its strains. Then in the field, 
Dhumr&ksha bow in hand, laughing, pursued the monkeys in 
all directions with showers of shafts. And seeing the forces 
hard beset by Dhumr&ksha and distressed thereat, the Wind- 
god’s offspring, waxing enraged, seizing a huge crag, 
approached (the R&kshasa). And with his eyes doubly 
reddened in wrath, that one, like unto his sire himself in 
prowess, brought down the crag upon Dhumr&ksha’s car. And 
seeing the crag, (Dhumr&ksha) upraising his mace hurriedly, 
leapt down in vehemence, and stood on the ground. And 
having shattered his car, that crag fell down to the earth. 
And thereat letting go the car furnished with wheels, Kuvaras 
and a face, as well as a banner ; in which Dhumr&ksha 
had left his bow,— Hanum&n — son unto the Wind-god — laid 
about him right lustily for destroying the R&kshasas,with trees 
having branches long and short. And thereat some R&kshasas 
with their heads shattered, lay drenched in blood ; and 
others, struck with trees, dropped down to the earth. And 
then Hanum&n — son unto the Wind-god — charged in full 
career against the R&kshasa army ; and, taking a mountain- 
peak, he rushed against Dhumr&ksha. And as Hanum&n 
was descending, the powerful Dhumr&ksha, upraising a mace, 
and giving out a shout, made towards him speedily. And 
then Dhumr&ksha enraged, brought down that mace studded 
with innumerable pricks, on the head of Hanum&n fired with 
wrath. And thus assailed with the mace of fearful impetu- 
osity, the monkey endowed with the strength of the wind, 
without at all heeding that blow, let fall a mountain-top 
right against Dhumr&ksha’s head. And on being assailed 
with the mountain-peak, Dhumr&ksha, having his entire body 
mangled, suddenly fell to the earth, like unto a toppling hill. 
And seeing Dhumraksha slain, those night-rangers that 
survived the carnage, in extreme agitation began to pour 
into Lank&, attacked by the monkeys. And that high-souled 
* A species of elephants. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





1256 



RAMAYaNa. 



offspring of the Wind-god, having slain his foes, and come 
under the influence of fatigue incident to his slaughtering 
his enemies, — having caused rivers of gore to flow (in the 
field), - experienced the excess of joy on being honored of the 
monkeys 



SECTION liii. 



Hearing DhumrSksha slain, RSLvana — lord of the 
Rakshasas — overwhelmed with a mighty rage, began to sigh 
like a serpent. And collied with passion, and sighing hot 
for a long time, he addressed a cruel Rakshasa — the exceed- 
ingly strong Vajradanshtra,* — “Go thou, O hero. Go out, 
environed by the Rakshasas. Slay Da^aratha’s son — Rama — 
and Sugriva along with the monkeys.” Thereupon hastily 
answering “So be it,” that foremost of the R&kshasas skilled 
in illusion, marched forth surrounded by many a leaderf of 
armies, furnished with elephants and steeds, mules and 
camels, — with his mind concentrated ; and adorned with 
innumerable variegated flags and banners. And then decked 
out with curious keyuras and a tiara, and wearing armour, he 
rushed out with his bow in his hand. And then going round 
his flaming vehicle, adorned with pennons and garnished 
with gold, the kingj ascended the same. And equipped with 
slender swords and curious tomaras and smooth maces and 
bhindipalas and bows and darts and pattigas and scimitars 
and discuses and clubs and sharpened axes, the multiform 
infantry march bearing arms in their hands. And all those 
powerful and flaming Rakshasas wore variegated raiments. 

* Lit.— the thunder-toothed. 

f Valai — forces — is interpreted leaders by the commentator. 

t Vajradanshtra. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





IVUDHAKXNDAM . 



1257 



And heroic elephants in rut resembling mountains in motion, 
marched, being led by those well-skilled in battle carrying 
tomaras and hooks in their hands. And mighty steeds 
bearing auspicious marks, marched, ridden by heroes. And 
that entire Rikshasa army, as it marched forth, resembled 
clouds in summer roaring with lightning. And (the R&k- 
shasas) sallied forth through the Southern Entrance, where 
that leader of herds — Angada — was stationed. And as they 
went out, evil omens appeared. From the cloudless yet fierce 
sky meteors began to shoot. And throwing up flames from 
their mouths, dreadful jackals began to emit cries. And fright- 
ful beasts betokened the destruction of the Rakshasas in battle. 
And warriors began to tumble down in an ominous way. 
Witnessing these evil omens, the exceedingly powerful and 
energetic Vajradanshtra, assuming patience, set out, eager for 
encounter. And seeing them flee away, the monkeys, 
burning for victory, set up tremendous shouts, filling all the 
ten cardinal points. And theu there came on a terrific 
encounter of the monkeys and the Rakshasas, dreadful, of 
terrific deeds, and wishing for each other’s death. And 
warriors fraught with high spirits, springing up, dropped 
down to the earth, their bodies and hands riven, and all their 
persons bathed in blood. And some approaching each other, 
with bludgeons in their hands, without turning away from 
the field, discharged various weapons at each other. And 
there were heard sounds of trees and rocks and weapons,— 
mighty and dreadful and capable of striking terror into the 
heart. And dreadful and mighty were the sounds of car-wheels, 
and conchs and trumpets and drums. And some, casting 
off weapons, engaged in a hand to hand combat by means of 
slaps, and kicks, and bones, and trees. And some Rakshasas, 
having their bodies broken, were killed by means of thighs. 
And some were crushed with crags by D&navas invincible 
in battle. And Vajradanshtra, resembling the noose-handed 
Destroyer, frightening the monkeys, ranged in that field 

158 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1258 



RAajA YANA . 



fatal to people. And Rakshasas, possessed of strength ; 
eq u ipped with various weapons, transported with passion, 
slew the monkey-forces. And then in the conflict the proud 
Wind-god’s son, influenced by twofold wrath, spread havoc 
among the Rakshasa ranks, like the Fire at the universal 
dissolution. And the energetic Angada possessed of the 
prowess of a lion, with his eyes coppery with wrath, upraising 
a tree, began to spread terrible destruction among the 
Rakshasas, even as a lion destroyeth tiny deer. And 
attacked by Angada there, the Rakshasas of dreadful vigor; 
with their heads riven, fell down like unto trees that have 
been uprooted. And the earth became frightful (to behold), 
being covered with variegated cars and standards and steeds 
and the bodies of monkeys and of Rakshasas and streams of 
blood. And adorned with chains, and Keyuras , and attires, 
and umbrellas, the field of battle looked like an autumnal 
night. And agitated by Angada’s impetuosity, that mighty 
army of Rakshasas began to shake, even as water trembleth, 
moved -by the wind. 



SECTION LIV. 



Finding his own army destroyed by the might of 
Angada, the exceedingly powerful Rakshasa — Vajradanshtra 
— was overcome with rage. And stretching his dreadful 
bow of the splendour of Sakra's thunder-bolt, he began to 
shower shafts among the monkey-ranks. And the foremost 
among the heroic Rakshasas also, stationed on cars, furnished 
with various arms, warred on in the encounter. And the 
heroic monkeys also — foremost of their kind — with rocks in 
their hands, faught around in united strength. And in that 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




flddhakAndam . 



1259 



conflict, the Rakshasas began to incessantly shower ayutas 
of arms among the flower of the monkey-army. And the 
monkeys,— pre-eminently valiant, and resembling mad 
elephants, kept showering over the Rakshasas mountain-trees 
and mighty rocks. And then took place a hot contest among 
heroic warring monkeys and Rakshasas, eager for encounter. 
And some, with their heads unbroken, had their arms and 
legs torn ; and tliir bodies pierced with weapons, and laved 
in blood. And monkeys and Rakshasas lay down in the 
field, — thronged with numbers of Kankas, and vultures; and 
swarming with flocks of jackals. And striking affright 
unto the timid, on the earth started up (spectral) headless 
trunks, — with their arms and heads torn, and their bodies 
riven all over. And monkeys and Rakshasas began to drop 
down to the earth. And the army of night-rangers, being 
sadly handled by the monkey-hosts, broke up at every point 
in the very sight of Vajradanshtra. And seeing the 
Rakshasas, distressed with fright and harassed by the 
monkeys, the powerful Vajradanshtra, with his eyes crimson- 
ed with choler, entered the arena, bow in hand, — frighten- 
ing the monkey-forces. And he began to pierce the monkeys 
with straight-speeding shafts winged with Kanka feathers ; 
and he pierced simultaneously seven, eight, nine, five,monkeys 
(in the field). And the exceedingly powerful Vajradanshtra, 
transported into a towering passion, began to cleave the 
hostile ranks. And thereat terrified, the monkeys, with 
their bodies cut with arrows, rushed towards Angada, like 
creatures resorting to the Creator. And finding the monkey- 
ranks disordered, Vali’s son in a rage cast his eyes on Vajra- 
danshtra, who also was eying|him. And Vajradanshtra and 
Angada faught fiercely with each other over and over again • 
ranging the field like a tiger and a mad elephant* Then 
(Vajradanshtra) with hundreds and thousands (of shafts) 

* Ha rimattaga jdviua — lit, like a lion and a mad elephant. The com 
mentator however, remarks, that the contest of a lion with an elephant is in- 



Digitized by C^ooQie 




I26o 



R&MlVANA. 



resembling tongues of flames, pierced the powerful son of the 
monkey in the vitals. Thereupon Vali ’s son of mighty strength 
and tremendous prowess, with his body covered all over with 
blood, hurled a tree at Vajradanshtra. And seeing the tree 
in full career, the Rakshasa without betraying any agitation, 
severed it in pieces \ and the tree, thus assailed, fell to the 
earth. And seeing that feat of Vajradanshtra, that foremost 
of monkeys, taking up a huge crag, hurled it (at his foe) and 
sent up shouts. And seeing this descend upon him, that 
powerful one, calmly leaping down from his vehicle, stood on 
his feet on the ground. And the crag discharged by Angada, 
coursing on in the field, dashed to pieces the car along with 
the wheels and v the Kuvara as well as the horses. And then 
the monkey, taking up another prodigious peak crowned with 
trees, let it alight on Vajradanshtra^ head. Thereat vomitting 
blood, Vajradanshtra, deprived of his senses, for a moment 
overcome with stupor, stood embracing his mace, sighing. 
And then the night-ranger, recovering his senses, with his 
mace, in high rage hit at the breast Vili’s son staying in the 
field. And thereupon, giving up his mace, he entered into 
/ a boxing encounter (with Angada). And hitting each other 
there, they both— the monkey and the Rakshasa, — began to 
vomit blood, and were overcome with fatigue consequent on 
the thrashing each sustained $ and they endowed richly with 
\ prowess, appeared like AngSraka and Budha* Then the 
exceedingly energetic Angada — best of — monkeys — uprooting 
a tree, stood there, covered with flowers and leaves. And 
(Vajradanshtra) took a shield composed of ass’s hide,t and 
a sword broad and sightly, covered with bells, and graced 
with a leathern sheath. And the monkey and the 
RSLkshasa displayed curious and graceful movements. And 

/compatible in the nature of things, for even an elephant dreaming of a lion, 
gives up the ghost ! — T. 

* The asterisms so called. 

t What could this weapon be like ? — T. 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDRAKlNDAM. 



I 26 l 

attacking each other, they gave shouts, eager for victory. 
And with blood flowing from their wounds, they looked 
beautiful like blossoming Kin^ukas. And warring, both, 
overcome with fatigue, went to the ground on their knees. 
Anon in the twinkling of an eye, that powerful monkey— 
Angada — started up, with his eyes glowing, — like unto a 
serpent that hath been smitten with a rod. And (at length) 
with his stainless and sharpened sword, Vali's son, endeued 
with exceeding strength severed Vajradanshtra's huge head. 
And the graceful head of that one having his body covered 
with blood, cut off by the sword, falling to the ground with 
its ©yes rolling, was severed in twain. Seeing Vajradanshtra 
slain, the Rakshasas, overwhelmed with fear and exceedingly 
agitated, in pitiful plight, with woe-begone faces and heads 
hung in shame, — fled towards LankS, attacked (all the while) 
by the monkeys. Having compassed Vajradanshtra’s 
destruction, the powerful son of V&li, endowed with 
exceeding strength, in the midst of the monkey-army 
experienced great joy on being honored by the monkeys, 
like the wielder of the thunder-bolt— the thousand-eyed 
(Deity)— surrounded by the celestials. 



SECTION LV. 



Hearing Vajradanshtra slain by the son of VSli, RAvana 
said unto the general of his forces, standing before him with 
joined hands, — “Let invincible Rakshasas of dreadful 
prowess, march forth, placing before them Akampana, skilled 
in all weapons and arms. ' He is capable of chastising foes 
as well as of protecting his own and leading them ; and he 
is excellent in warfare. And he is always desirous of my 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1262 



RAMAYANa . 



prosperity, and always loveth warfare. He will conquer the 
KSkutsthas, as well as Sugriva endowed with exceeding 
strength, and, without doubt, slay all the other dreadful 
monkeys.” Taking R&vana’s command, that highly powerful 
one endowed with fleet vigor, marshalled those forces. Then 
equipped with various arms, the foremost of Rakshasas, 
having dreadful eyes (in their heads), and of dreadful forms, 
marched forth, urged on by their general. And, ascending 
a large car, adorned with burnished gold, Akampana,* 
possessed of the splendour of clouds,* and cloud-hued, 
and furnished with a voice resembling the roar of clouds, 
went out, environed by R&kshasas of terrific forms. And 
Akampana, resembling the sun in power, was incapablef 
of being shaken in fight by the very gods, and of being 
beheld by them.J And as, burning for battle, he rushed 
out in wrath, the steeds drawing his car suddenly lost 
their energy. And the left eye of that one delighting in 
encounter, began to throb. And his countenance grew pale, 
and his voice faltered. And in a fair day, it looked foul with 
the wind breathing roughly. And fierce and frightful beasts 
and birds began to emit cries. And that lion-shouldered 
one like a tiger in prowess, without heeding these ominous 
occurences, marched forth into the field. And as that 
Rakshasa was setting out along with the Rakshasas, he set 
up mighty roars as if agitating the deep. And the mighty 
army of monkeys was seized with trepidation at that sound. 
And then there took place a mighty encounter of the 
Rakshasas and the monkeys equipped staying in fight with 
trees and rocks ; who had given up all concern for their 
selves in behalf of R&ma and Ravana. And each side desirous 

* There is a pun here on the word* Akampana — lit . — one incapable of being 
shaken. — T. 

f Possessed of a person measuring, according to the commentator, a mass of 
clouds. I give the apparent sense, which answers. — T. 

t Monkeys. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




FlrDDHA KkNDA M. 



1263 



of slaying the other, the monkeys and the R&kshasas were ex- 
ceedingly strong and heroic and like unto mountains. And each 
party storming at the other, in that conflict were heard loud 
cries emitted by those swift-speeding ones in anger. And fear- 
ful was the dust red-hued that was raised incessantly by the 
monkeys and the Rakshas ; and it enveloped the ten cardinal 
points. And in the field of battle, each enveloped with that 
dust raised, pale as silk, could not be discovered by the other. 
And in consequence of that dust arising, neither standard, 
nor ensign, nor shield, nor steed, nor weapon, nor car could 
be seen. And the fierce cries alone of those roaring and 
rushing were heard in that dreadful battle ; but their forms 
were not visible to the sight. And in that conflict in the 
dark then monkeys enraged slew monkeys, and Rakshasas 
Rakshsasas. And monkeys and R&kshasas slaying (indis- 
criminately) friends and foes, made the earth wet with 
blood, and miry. And then with showers of blood the dust 
was layed ; and the earth was covered with corpses. And 
Rakshasas and monkeys fast slew each other vigorously with 
trees and darts, maces and pracas , rocks, bludgeons and 
tomarasy and by means of their arms resembling bludgeons, 
coped with their adversaries appearing like hills. And 
in the encounter monkeys slew Rakshasas of dreadful 
deeds. And in their turn Rakshasas, wrought up with 
passion, bearing in their hands pragas and tomaras 
destroyed monkeys wielding dire arms. And that leader 
of the force— Akampana — growing wroth, inspired with 
cheerfulness all the Rakshasas endowed with dreadful vigor. 
And the monkeys forcibly snatching away the weapons (of 
the Rakshasas), began to rive the Rakshasas with mighty 
trees and giant crags. In the meanwhile those heroes among 
the monkeys — Kumuda, Nila and the exceedingly exasperat- 
ed Mainda, summoned the utmost impetuosity they were 
masters of. And those foremost of monkeys and redoubtable 
able warriors without much ado began to spread quite a 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1264 



RlMAkANA . 



carnage in the van of the R&kshasa army, and by means of 
various arms terribly beat the R&kshasas. 



SECTION LVI. 



A.ND witnessing that mighty exploit of the foremost of 
the monkeys, Akampana waxed furious with wrath. And 
transported with passion, he, twanging his mighty bow, 
seeing that feat of his foe, addressed his charioteer saying, — 
°0 charioteer, swiftly conduct thou the car to that same 
place. These powerful ones are slaying innumerable 
R&kshasas in fight. And all those vigorous monkeys of 
dreadful deeds stay before me, armed with trees and rocks. 
Those, pluming themselves overmuch on their martial 
worth, I intended to slay in battle. And all this R&kshasa 
force appeared to be harassed by these.” Then on a car 
drawn by moving steeds, Akampana from a distance 
attacked the monkeys with showers of arrows. And 
thereat the monkeys could not so much as maintain their 
ground in the field, — and how could they fight ? And broken 
by the arrows of Akampana, they began to fly. And the ex- 
ceedingly strong Hanum&n, seeing his kindred come under 
the masterdom of Death and follow the course pursued by the 
shafts of Akampana, advanced (to the conflict). And seeing 
that mighty monkey, all those heroic prime monkeys together 
surrounded (HanumSLn) in the field. And those best of 
monkeys, seeing Hanum&n stay, grew strong by relying on 
that strong one. And even as the great Indra showereth down 
rain, Akampana showered shafts on Hanuman resembling a 
mountain-summit in grandeur. And without casting a 
thought on the showers of arrows poured on his person, that 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUbDHAKhNDA M. 



1265 



monkey gifted with exceeding strength, set his heart on 
compassing the death ctf Akampana. And laughing, that 
exceedingly energetic offspring of the Wind-god rushed after 
that Raksha, as if making the Earth herself tremble. And 
the form of that one roaring and flaming up in energy, was 
irresistible, like unto the appearance of a flaming fire. And 
thinking that he was unfurnished with any arms, that foremost 
of monkeys, waxing wroth, vehemently rooted up a hill. And 
taking that huge hill, the Wind-god’s son endowed with 
prowess, sending tip a tremendous roar, began to whirl it 
with a single arm. And as of yore Purandara had in 
encounter pursued N^muchi with the thunder-bolt, (Hanuman) 
pursued that best of R&kshasas — Akampana. And Akampana, 
seeing that uplifted crag, from a distance cut it off with 
mighty crescent-shaped shafts. And finding that mountain- 
top severed by the shafts of the Raksha and scattered in 
pieces, Hanumfin was seized with a mighty wrath. And that 
monkey, wrought up with rage and pride, grasping an 
A^wakarna elevated like unto a hill, at once uprooted it. 
And taking that broad-shouldered A^wakarna, that one 
furnished with high splendour, with great glee whirled it 
above the ground. And thereat rushing amain vehemently, 
(Akampana) speedily broke the trees * And (seeing this), 
Hanunvin, transported with passion, rived the earth with his 
kicks. And Hanum&n slaughtered elephants, and the riders 
thereof, and cars with their riders, and dreadful Rakshasas, 
and footmen. And seeing the enraged Hanuman resembling 
the Finisher armed with trees and destructive, the Rlkshasas 
began to fly fast. And seeing that one enraged, terrific unto 
the Rakshasas, the heroic Akampana was agitated greatly 
and sent up shouts. And Akampana pierced Hanuman 
endowed with exceeding prowess with four and ten shafts, 
sharpened and capable of cleaving the bodies of people. 
And thus covered with iron arrows and whetted darts, that 

* Why plural ? So it is, however, in the text. — T. 

*59 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1266 



KAMA VAN A, 



h er o — Hanum5n— looked like a hill covered with trees. And 
that huge-bodied one endowed with wondrous prowess and 
great strength, appeared like a flowering A 9 oka or a fire 
without smoke. And then uprooting another tree, (Hanuman) 
summoning up his best impetuosity, swiftly hit Akampana — 
foremost of Rakshasas— on the head. And slain with that tree 
by that high-souled monkey-chief wrought up with passion, 
that R§kshasa fell down and died.* And seeing that fore- 
most of Rakshasas — Akampana — slain (and lying) on the 
ground, — the Rakshasas were extremely aggrieved, and 
(appeared) like trees in an earthquake. And those Rakshasas 
defeated, leaving their arms behind, made for Lanka in fear, 
pursued by the monkeys. And with their hair flowing loosely, 
(the Rakshasas), afflicted with affright, and despirited and 
beaten, fled fast, with the water of fatigue running down their 
persons. And crushing down each other, they entered the 
city in a panic, momentarily casting their looks behind them. 
When the Rakshasas had entered Lanka, the exceedingly 
mighty monkeys, assembled together, paid homage unto 
Hanuman. And Hanuman, gifted with strength, honored 
the seniors each as he deserved in consideration of his 
lineage. And the monkeys eager for victory shouted with 
might and main, and began to drag the Rakshasas with the 
view 7 of taking their lives. And that mighty monkey — son 
unto, the Wind god — having destroyed the Rakshasas and 
arrived (in the midst of n)e host), attained heroic glory, — even 
as did Vishnu, having slain that destroyer of enemies — the 
mighty and dreadful Asura possessed of exceeding strength, 
— stationed in the van of the forces. And then the deities 
and Rama himself and the highly powerful Lakshmana, and 
also the monkeys headed by Sugriva, and Bibhishana 
endowed with great strength, honored that monkey. 

* This sentence, “And slain and died” reads foolish. But the original is 

answerable for — in logicaljparlance — this identical proposition. — T. 



Digged b Google 








1 VDDHA KANDA M. 



I 267 



SECTION LVII 

Hearing that Akampana had been killed, the lord of 
Rakshasas, overwhelmed with anger, with his face somewhat 
fallen, cast his eyes on his counsellors. And then pondering 
and reflecting for a while, in the forenoon he went round the 
city of Lanka for inspecting the barracks. And the king 
surveyed the city guarded by the Rakshasas, covered with 
innumerable barracks, and crowned with ensigns and 
standards. And seeing the city beseiged, Ravana — lord of 
the Rakshasas — seasonably spoke words of welfare unto 
Prahasta skilled in fight, — “Save battle, deliverance find 1 none 
for the city suddenly beleaguered and put to straits. And 

this strain must be borne by these versed in warfare me 

or Kumbhakarna or thee — my general — or Indrajit or 
Nikumbha* And therefore do thou from this place, speedily 
taking this force, march to where the monkeys are, for 
securing victory (in the encounter). And as soon as thou 
settest out, the monkey-forces, hearing the roars of the 
foremost Rakshasas — speedily setting themselves in motion, 
— shall flee away. And volatile and haughty and of fickle 
minds, the monkeys will not be able to bear thy shouts ; even 
as elephants are incapable of bearing the roaring of a lion. 
And on that monkey-army running away, Rama in company 
with Sumitra’s son, deprived of his power and shorn of 
support, shall, O Prahasta, come under thy subjection. In 
this matter, thy being slain is uncertain, but victory is 
certain. Now do thou, as thou weighest our welfare, declare 
thyself for or against this course.” Thus addressed by 
Ravana, Prahasta — general of the forces — said unto the 
Rakshasa-chief \ like Uganas addressing the lord of Asuras, 

* Grammatically faulty such is the sentence in the original. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 



iz63 



RnAlA if ANA, 



— “O king, before ibis we had deliberated together with wise 
counsellors, and then we disputed with each other in our res- 
pective views. And I had declared myself for giving up Sita 
as fraught with our welfare ; and we saw war involved in 
witholding her. 1 have ever been honored by thee variously 
with gifts and regard and soft speech. And what is thy good 
for which I shall not be at the pains ? My life 1 do not care 
to keep, — nor yet my sons or my wife. Behold ! for thee will 
1 offer up my life into the sacrificial fire of conflict.” Having 
said this unto his master^— Havana — the general, Prahasta, 
addressed his generals staying before him, saying,— 1 ‘‘At 
once bring up the mighty host of Rakshasas. To-day in the 
field of fight will 1 entertain the flesh-feeding fowls of the 
forest with the bodies of the foes slain with my resistless 
shafts/’ Hearing his speech, the highly powerful leaders 
arrayed the army in that abode of the R&kshasa. And in a 
moment LankS swarmed with heroic and terrific Rakshasas 
equipped with various arms, — as if with elephants, — as well 
as with people worshipping Fire and bowing down unto 
Brahmanas. And the perfumed breeze blew, laden with the in- 
cense of sacrificial offerings. And the Rakshasas, inspired with 
martial ardour, put on diverse garlands, consecrated with 
scriptural formulae ; and donned on their armour. And 
furnished with their bows and wearing their armour, the 
Rarkshasas, on seeing king Havana, leaving (their vehicles), 
stood, surrounding Prahasta. Then greeting the monarch, 
Prahasta, furnished (with all appliances of battle), — winding 
his dreadful trumpet, ascended his car ; having all sorts of 
weapons ; yoked with wondrous fleet steeds ; driven by a 
competent charioteer, — excellently furnished ; sending up 
sounds resembling the rumbling of mighty masses of cloud, — 
appearing like the very Sun or Moon ; invincible with a 
serpent-standard ; having a defence as well as a portion 
exceedingly handsome ; netted with gold all round ; and 
seeming to be laughing in grace. And then, ascending this 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YLDDHaKANDAM . 



1269 



car, Prahasta, whom RSLvana had entrusted with authority, 
surrounded by a vast host, swiftly went out of Lank§. And 
then there were heard the sounds of kettle-drums, resembling 
the roars of Parjanya, — and the sounds of musical instruments, 
as if filling the Earth. And on that general of the forces 
marching, sounds of conchs were heard (all around) ; and the 
Rakshasas of dreadful forms and huge bodies, going before 
Prahasta, advanced, emitting tremendous roars. And 
Narantaka* Kambhahanu, Mahanada,t and Samunnata,J — 
Prahasta’s counsellors all of them-— went on, surrounding 
him. And he went out by the Eastern entrance, environed 
by this exceedingly dreadful array, resembling troops of 
elephants. And resembling the Destroyer — Yama himself— 
Prahasta in rage went out surrounded by that mighty 
host resembling the sea. And at the tumult raised by 
their exodus, as well as the roars of the Rakshasas, all 
creatures in Lanka began to cry in preternatural tones. 
And swarming under the cloudless welkin, birds feasting on 
flesh and gore began to gyrate at the right hand of the car. 
And dreadful jackals, emitting live flames from their mouths, 
set up cries. And stars began to shoot from the firmament ; 
and the winds to ruffle. And enraged at each other, the 
planetary bodies were shorn of their brightness. And clouds 
emitting sharp sounds, showered down blood upon the car, and 
those marching in front were washed therewith. And alighting 
at tli.e topof the standard,a vulture set up cries, facing the south, 
and began to prick both its sides,— thereby depriving(Prahasta) 
of his grace. And from the hands of his charioteer and his 
driver conducting the steeds, never given to turning away from 



* Lit. destroyer of men. Almost all the names of the Rdkshasas are thus 
significant names. This assigning of names, embosoming some harmonising 
image, has by Sir Francis Palgrave, justly been considered as betokening a 
high poetical faculty, 
f Lit. — loud’throated. 

X Lit. — lofty. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1270 



RaMKYINa . 



the field, the goad began to drop again and again. And 
the auspiciousness that was bright and rare when the army 
set out, was clean gone in a moment, — and the steeds began 
to stumble on even ground. And as Prahasta of renowned 
worth and valor marched, the monkey-army equipped with 
various arms, presented themselves before him. And loud 
was the tumult that was raised by the monkeys. And mighty 
was the din that was heard of those, uprooting trees and 
taking up ponderous crags, of the Rikshasas roaring and the 
monkeys storming in both the exhilarated armies of Rakshas 
and wood-rangers, — of vehement and able (warriors) eager for 
slaying each other, and challenging each other to fight. And 
like an insect falling into a flame, the wicked-minded Prahasta, 
for obtaining victory, increasing his impetuosity entered into 
that host of the monkey-king. 



SECTION l v 1 1 1 . 



Seeing Prahasta sally, ready for encounter, that chastiser 
of foes — Rama — with a smile said unto Bibhishana, — “Who is 
this huge-bodied one that armed with impetuosity, advanceth 
to the encounter? And what is his power and prowess like? 
O mighty-armed one, tell me this concerning this powerful 
night-ranger. ,, Hearing Raghava’s words, Bibhishana answered, 
— ‘ In Lanka this is the general of the lord of R&kshasas — • 
the R&kshasa named Prahasta, surrounded by a third of the 
forces. He is possessed of prowess and is of distinguished 
gallantry. And that mighty army of strong monkeys, 
wrought up with wrath, and roaring at Prahasta, saw him 
dreadful and of terrific prowess and huge-bodied, — surround- 
ed on all sides by the R&kshasas, — and setting up roars, 
marching. And the Rakshasas, eagerly desirous of victory, 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHAKkNDAM. 



1271 

pursued the monkeys, wielding swords and darts and rishtis, 
and javelins and shafts and maces and clubs and bludgeons 
and prdgas and various axes and curious bows. And the 
monkeys on their part, eager for encounter, took up flowering 
trees and hills and huge and broad crags. And each party 
approaching the other, great was the encounter that took 
place. And innumerable (monkeys and Rakshasas) kept 
showering rocks and arrows. And many Rakshasas in 
conflict slew many a powerful monkey, and the monkeys on 
their part slaughtered many a Rakshasa. And some were 
pierced with darts and with (other) powerful weapons ; and 
some were wounded with bludgeons ; and some were hewn 
with axes. And some rendered senseless, dropped down to 
the earth ; and some hit with weapons, had their breasts riven. 
And some, severed in twain with swords, dropped to the earth 
lifeless. And monkeys were hewn in their sides by heroic 
Rakshasas. And numbers of Rakshasas all around were 
beaten to the ground by infuriated monkeys with trees and 
mountain-peaks. And some smitten sore with slaps having 
the touch of the thunder-bolt, began to vomit blood from 
their mouths, with faces and eyes turned pale. And great 
was the uproar that arose in consequence of Rakshasas and 
monkeys emitting distressful cries and sending forth leonine 
roars. And monkeys and Rakshasas wrought up with wrath, 
engaged in treading the path of heroes, — looking terrific with 
their faces moving about, — performed deeds of intrepid 
courage. And Narantaka and Kambhahanu and. MahanSLda 
and Samunnata — all counsellors of Prahasta — set about 
slaughtering the rangers of the woods. Of these doing swift 
execution among the monkeys, Dwivida, taking up a 
mountain-peak, slew one — namely Nar&ntaka. And then the 
monkey, Durmukha, rising up afresh, armed with a mighty 
tree, killed the light-handed RSkshasa — Samunnata. And 
Jifcmbav&n endowed with energy, waxing enraged, uplifting 
a giant crag brought the same down on Mah&n&da’s breast. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1272 RAmAi'aNA. 

And there speedily assailed by T&ra, with a mighty tree, the 
powerful Kumbhahanu gave up the ghost in the conflict. And 
not brooking that feat, Prahasta, mounted on a car, taking 
a bow in his hand, fell to spreading a dreadful havoc among 
the rangers of the woods. And then there the two hosts 
mingled into almost a vortex ; and the sounds that arose from 
those infuriated ones of immeasurable might, resembled the 
roar of the ocean. And in terrific encounter the enraged 
R&kshasa irresistible in battle drove the monkeys to sore 
straits with showers of arrows. And the earth was covered 
quite with the terrible bodies of monkeys and Rakshasas ; 
and it looked as if covered with mountains. And the earth 
drenched with streams of gore looked as if swarming 
with blossoming palagas in the month of spring. And 
as leaders of elephant-herds cross a lotus-tank covered 
with lotus-dust, those Rakshasas and choice monkeys 
crossed that river flowing in the field of conflict incapable 
of being crossed; having for her banks hosts of heroic warriors 
slain ; for her mighty trees broken arms ; for her volume of 
waters showers of blood ; coursing to Yama resembling the 
Ocean ; with livers and spleens for her vast slime j with 
scattered entrails for her moss ; with riven bodies and heads 
for her fish ; limbs for her lawns ; swarming with vultures 
for her swans ; with Kankas for her cranes ; filled with fat 
representing her foam ; with the roars (of warriors) for her 
sounds, — incapable of being crossed by cravens, — and resem- 
bling a real river swarming at the end of the rains with 
cranes and swans. Then all of a sudden Nila saw Prahasta 
stationed on his car, discharging vollies of shafts and 
harassing the monkeys therewith. And mounted on a sun- 
bright vehicle, that leader of the army — Prahasta — seeing 
Nila advance towards him amain in the encounter, like the 
wind in the sky scattering a mighty mass of clouds, — 
rushed towards Nila. And that leader of forces — Prahasta 
—foremost of bowmen, stretching his bow, began to shower 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




vddhakAndam. 



arrows on Nila. And having pierced Nila sort and wounded 
him, those shafts sought the earth like enraged serpents. 
And that mighty monkey — Nila — endowed with energy, struck 
with those sharpened shafts resembling flames, — uprooting 
a tree, assailed therewith the irrepressible Prahasta — who was 
rushing against him. And thereat, that foremost of Rakshasas, 
on being attacked, flaming up into fury and uttering roars, — 
poured showers of arrows on the monkey-leader. And not 
being able to resist the arrowy vollies of that wicked-minded 
R&kshasa, (Nila) bore them, even* as a bull beareth with 
closed eyes a fast-descending autumnal shower. And in the 
very same way did Nila with his eyes closed suddenly stand 
the mighty arrowy buffet ot Prahasta incapable of being 
withstood. And wrought up with rage, the exceedingly 
strong and mighty Nila with a giant Sdla slew the steeds of 
Prahasta. And then his soul surcharged with . wrath, Nila 
swiftly shattered the bow of that wicked-minded one, and 
then shouted again and again. On being bereft of his bow, 
Prahasta, general of forces, taking a terrible mace, leapt 
down from his car. And the redoubtable leaders endowed 
with activity, bearing hostility to each other, their persons 
bathed in blood, stood (on the ground) like two elephants 
(with their temples) riven. And they kept tearing each other 
with their teeth like a lion and a tiger, and also striving 
like a lion and a tiger. And endowed with victorious vigor, 
those heroes, never knowing to desist from fight, were eager 
for fame, even like Vritra and Vasava (fighting). And then 
Prahasta putting forth his dearest effort, hit Nila on the 
temples with a mace ; and the blood began to flow. And 
then the mighty monkey, with his person drenched in blood, 
—wrought up with passion, discharged a tall tree at Prahasta’s 
breast. And without caring for that hit, he, taking up 
a mighty mace, furiously rushed against the monkey— 
Nila. And witnessing that enraged (hero) rushing against 
him with exceeding impetuosity, that redoubted monkey 
160 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1274 



RAMirkNA. 



endowed with vehemence, took up a tremendous crag. And 
in the encounter Nila at once let that crag alight right on the 
head of Prahasta, eager for encounter and fighting with the 
mace. And hurled by that foremost of monkeys, that huge 
and terrific crag then shattered Prahasta’s head in pieces. 
And then bereft of life and shorn of nerve and devoid of 
sense, he suddenly dropped down to the earth like a tree whose 
roots have been severed. And even as fountains flow from 
the sides of a hill, blood flowed profusely from the person of 
that one, whose head* had been riven. On Prahasta being 
slain by Nila, that mighty army of Rakshasas, never trembling 
(from fear),— retreated towards Lank£. And like waters 
rushing (through a breach in) a dyke, the Rakshasas 
could not stand their ground, on their leader being slain. 
And on that head of the hosts being killed, the Rakshasas, 
growing dispirited, repairing to the residence of the lord of 
Rakshas, remained plunged in thought, without speaking 
anything. And plunged in that sea of sorrow, they seemed 
as if they had been bereft of their senses. And then the 
highly powerful and victorious Nila, leader of forces, on being 
extolled with gracious offices, and on being joined by R<Lma 
and Lakshmana, looked exceedingly exhilarated. 



SECTION LIX. 



A-ND on the leader of the Rakshasa host being slain in 
battle by the foremost of monkeys, that army of the Rikshasa 
monarch, resembling the ocean in violence,— furnished with 
dreadful weapons, began to scamper away. And going to 
the lord of the Rakshasas, they apprised him of the dealth of 
his general at the hands of the Fire-god’s offspring. And 
hearing those words of theirs, the Rakshasa lord was over- 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YZjDDHaKINDAM . 



1275 

come with rage. And hearing that Prahasta had been killed 
in battle, (he), exercised with passion, with his heart 
influenced with grief, addressed those foremost of the 
Rakshasa hosts, even as Indra addresses the chiefs among 
the celestials, saying, — “That foe should no longer be dis- 
regarded that hath slain along with his followers and elephants 
that leader of my hosts that had destroyed the forces of Indra 
himself. Therefore, without taking thought, will I, for com- 
passing the destruction of the foe, myself march to that marvell- 
ous field of fight. And to-day, even as a flaming fire burneth 
down a forest, will I with showers of shafts burn up that 
monkey-army, and Rama and Lakshmana.” Saying this, that 
enemy of the sovereign of the immortals asceuded a flaming 
vehicle of dazzling sheen yoked to rows of excellent steeds,— 
displaying itself gloriously and having a glowing body. And 
eulogized with sacred hymns, the sovereign of the Rakshasa 
rulers then set out to the sounds of conchs and trumpets and 
panavas ; and in the midst of those produced by persons 
striking at their arms, with their hands, and of the sounds 
defiance, and leonine roars. And like that lord of the im- 
mortals — Rudra — surrounded by ghosts, the foremost of the 
R&kshsa monarchs was surrounded by bands of flesh-feeding 
(Rakshas) resembling cliffs and clouds, — with eyes glowing like 
fire. And at once issuing from the city, that one endowed with 
high energy saw that fierce array of monkeys, extended as the 
ocean or a mighty mass of clouds, — with arms upraised with 
rocks and stones. And seeing that terrific host of Rakshasas, 
that eminently auspicious one, followed by the forces, having 
arms resembling the lord of serpents — Rama — spoke unto 
Bibhishana, foremost of those bearing arms, — “Whose is this 
force furnished with various ensigns and standards — and 
equipped with prdcas and swords and darts and other arms, 
—consisting of intrepid (Rakshasas), and having elephants 
resembling Mahendra* itself.” Then hearing Rama’s speech, 

* The mountain so named. 



* 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1276 



RliuA rAiVA. 



Bibhishana, possessed of the prowess of Sakra himself, in- 
formed R&ma anent that foremost of hosts consisting of that 
flower of high-souled RSkshasas, saying, — “O king, him do thou 
know to be Akampana, who, possessed of a high soul, is on 
the back of that elephant, — whose face looks like the sun new 
risen, and who approacheth making the head of his elephant 
tremble (with the splendour of his person).* And that one is 
named Indrajit — foremost by virtue of the boon (that he hath 
obtained), who ascending a car and having a lion for his 
ensign, — twangeth his bow like the very bow of Sakra 
displayed, — and who with his terrific round teeth appeareth 
like an elephant. And that one of a gigantic person is named 
AtikSya, that, like unto the Setting-hill of Vindhya, fur- 
nished with the bow and stationed on a car, — highly heroic, 
stretcheth his bow of unparalleled proportions. And that high- 
souled hero is named Mahodara that, furnished with right 
coppery eyes resembling the sun new risen, and ascending 
a car resonant with the sound of hells, shouteth shrill. 
And that one having the vehemence of the thunder-bolt is 
PigScha, that, mounted on a steed in variegated golden 
trappings, and having the aspect of a mass of evening clouds, 
or a mountain, — (appeareth) with a pragci furnished with 
effulgence. And that one is the famed Trigiras, + that, 
grasping a whetted dart endowed with the splendour of 
lightning and having the speed of the thunder for its minister, 
approacheth, riding a bull — the best of his species — and 
having the appearance of the Moon himself. And that one 
looking like a mass of clouds, that, having a broad and beauti- 
ful breast and a banner surmounted with the king of serpents, 
goeth in collected carriage, stretching his bow is Kumbha. 
And that one is Nikumbha of wondrous valorous deeds (in 



* This meaning is the commentator’s. 

t Some other than the celebrated hero slain by R£ma at the very outset of 
bit sojourn in Dandaka. — T. 



Digitized by 




yuddhakXndam . 



1*77 



battle) that, grasping a flaming and smoky* bludgeon 
embellished with gold and diamonds, cometh — a very banner of 
the entire Raksha host. And that one is Nar&ntaka, fighting 
with mountain-peaks, — that appeareth before us, mounted 
on a car flaming like fire, furnished with pennons and 
equipped with bows and swords and shafts. And that crusher 
of the hauteur of even the celestials, — that surrounded by 
various spectres of dreadful forms having faces of tigers, or 
camels, or powerful elephants, or deer, or horses, — and with 
their eyes rolling, — where the white umbrella resembling 
the Moon, — shineth, graced with slender ribs — the high- 
souled sovereign of Rnkshas appeareth like Rudra himself 
environed by spectres, — the sovereign of the Rakshas decked 
with a diadem, with his countenance graced with pendulous 
ear-rings, — with a person resembling that monarch of 
mountains — even Vindhya himself, — that humbler of the pride 
of Indra the Great and Yama, — shineth like the Sun.” Then 
Rama — repressor of foes — answered Bibhishana, saying, — 
“Alas ! Ravana — lord of the Rakshasas— is of exceeding 
glowing splendour ; and Ravana shineth in glory, and is in- 
capable of being gazed at like the Sun himself. And his grace, 
being enshrouded in his own splendour, I cannot view plainly. 
And the persons of celestials appear splendid as doth 
the person of the Rakshasa-chief. And all the warriors 
of that high-souled one are like mountains and fight with 
crags ; and all are equipped with flaming weapons. And 
environed by glowing ghosts of dreadful forms and fierce- 
looking and furnished with material tenements’!*, — the king of 
R&kshasas appeareth imposing like the Destroyer himself. 
And by luck it is that to-day the wickea-minded one hath 
come within the range of my vision ; and to-day will I vent 

* On account of lapises set on it. 

t Having, according to the commentator, goodly persons. But dehavadvi 
is literally having bodies ; and this sense, with reference to spirits, I fancy, 
fits in with the context. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




3278 



rAmAfana. 



my wrath incident to the ravishment of Sita.” Having said 
this, Rama endowed with prowess, ever followed by 
Lakshmana, stood, taking up his bow and pulling out 
a powerful shaft. And then that high-souled lord of 

Rakshasas addressed that mighty host, saying, — “Do ye 
casting off fear stay at ease, at the gateways, high ways, and 
the edifices (in Lanka). Taking note of this lapse, — viz., that 
ye have all come hither with me, the wood-rangers in a body, 
subduing the empty city incapable of being withstood, — shall 
suddenly put (all) to straits.” Then leaving those counsellors, 
(R&vana\ on the Rakshas having departed agreeably to his 
injunction, dived into that ocean of monkeys, like a mighty 
fish diving into the waves of over brimming deep. And 
seeing the lord of Rakshasas, furnished with flaming a bow 
and arrows, — suddenly rushing, — the king of monkeys, uproot- 
ing a mighty mountain-top, darted against the sovereign of 
the Rakshas. And taking up that mountain-peak having its 
sides covered with innumerable trees, he hurled it at the 
night ranger. And seeing it descend swiftly, (R&vana) in 
battle severed the same by means of gold-knobbed shafts. 
And on that gigantic peak furnished with fair sides filled 
with trees, falling to the earth, severed in pieces, — the lord of 
Rakshasas took up an arrow, resembling a mighty serpent 
and having the splendour of the Destroyer himself. And 
taking that shaft endowed with the vehemence of the wind, 
flaming like a fire aglow, and having the impetuosity of the 
great Indra’s thunder-bolt, (Ravana) hurled it in rage to 
compass the destruction of Sugriva. And even as the fierce 
dart discharged by Guha* had pierced Krauncha,+ that shaft 
shot by Ravana, rushing in violence at Sugriva possessed of 
a person having the touch of Sakra’s thunder-bolt, pierced it. 
Thereat, agonised by the shaft, that hero, with his senses 
bewieldered, dropped down to the ground with shrieks. And 

* The generallissimo of the celestials. 

f The mountain so named. 



Digitized by 



Google 




Y it bDH A KXNUA M. 



1279 



seeing him down on the earth bereft of his senses, the 
Yatudhanas were filled with rejoicing. And then Gavaksha 
and Gavaya, Sushena, Rishabha, Jyotimukha and Nala, up- 
rooting crags and magnifying their bodies, rushed against the 
lord of Rakshasas. And the lord of R&kshasas with hundreds 
of shafts having sharpened heads, rendered their strokes 
fruitless. And then he rived those foremost of monkeys with 
showers of arrows having variegated golden knobs, and 
covered those fierce monkey- ranks with networks of arrows. 
And on being sore assailed and falling in consequence, those 
heroes, the monkeys, pierced with terrific arrows, and 
distressed with the shafts of R&vana, emitting cries, sought 
the shelter of Rama worthy of being sought. Then the 
high-souled and excellent bowman — Rama, — taking his bow, 
at once sallied forth. And thereat, Lakshmana, approaching 
Rama, with joined hands addressed him words couching 
prime import. “O noble one, L alone am fit to compass the 
destruction of this wicked-minded one. I will slay him. Do 
thou, O master, permit me.” To him replied Rama of 
exceeding energy, having truth for his prowess, — “Go then, 
O Lakshmana, and put forth thy utmost exertions in the 
encounter. Ravana is forsooth endowed with mighty energy, 
and his prowes in battle is wonderful. Without doubt, when 
enraged, he is incapable of being borne by this triple world. 
Do thou keep an eye on his shortcomings as thou shouldst 
watch thine own failings. Being always on the alert, thou 
must with thy eyes as much as thy bow protect thyself.” 
Hearing Raghava’s speech, Sumitr&’s son, embracing Rama, 
and saluting him and paying him his respects, went forth to 
battle. And (going unto the field), he found Rlvana, endowed 
with arms resembling the trunks of elephants,— wielding his 
dreadful and flaming bow, and covering with showers of 
arrows those monkeys, whose bodies had been swarming with 
shafts. And seeing Ravana, the exceedingly powerful Haunm&n 
—son unto the Wind-god— resisting that downpour of 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




uSo 



RnMA rANA . 



arrows t charged him vehemently. And coming at his car, the 
intelligent Hanum&n, uplifting his right arm and terrifying 
Ravana, said, — “Incapable of being slain by gods, D&navas or 
Gandharvas, Yakshas or Rlkshasas, — Fear hath (at last; found 
thee, coming even from monkeys. This my upraised right 
arm furnished with five fingers, shall rob thee of thy soul long 
resident (in thy body).” Hearing HanumSm’s speech, Ravana 
possessed of dreadful prowess, with his eyes reddened in 
wrath, said these words, — “Strike thou swift maugre fear ; 
and acquire lasting renown. And, O monkey, having (at 
first) taken the measure of thy might, will I finish thee.” 
Hearing Ravana’s words, the offspring of the Wind-god 
said, — “(First) remember thou thy son — Aksha — slaughtered 
by me !” Thus addressed, the exceedingly energetic lord of 
the Rakshasas possessed of prowess dealt a slap unto the 
offspring of the Wind -god. And struck with his slap, he 
shook momentarily. And staying for a moment and calling 
up fortitude, that magnanimous one administered a slap unto 
the foe of the immortals. And hit by the high souled 
monkey, the Ten-necked one trembled, as trembleth a 
mountain during an earthquake. And witnessing Ravana 
struck with a slap (by Hanuman saints and Siddhas and 
celestials and the Asuras shouted in glee. Then attaining 
a little respite, Ravana said, — “Well done, O monkey. In 
prowess thou art a foe I pride in.” Thus addressed by 
Rcivana, the Wind-god’s son said, — “Fie on my prowess, 
seeing that thou breathest yet, O Ravana. Strike at 
the same time, O perverse one. Why dost thou bluster ? 
And then my blow shall despatch thee to the mansions of 
Yama.” And at the speech of the Wind-god’s son, his ire 
flamed up. And then that one endowed with prowess, 
clenching his right fist carefully, let it alight amain on the 
monkey’s chest. And hit at his spacious chest, HanumSn 
shook over and over again. And seeing the mighty 

Hanuman overwhelmed, that powerful car-warrior ascended 



Digitized by 




F 0 T)DH A KkN DA M . 



1281 

on his car, approached Nila. And the powerful lord of 
Rakshasas — the Ten-necked one — made that general of forces 
— Nila — aflame with dreadful shafts entering into the vitals, 
resembling snakes. And assailed with shafts, Nila — leader 
of monkeys — with one arm took up a mountain-top and 
hurled it at the lord of Rakshas. And the energetic and 
high-minded Hanum&n, attaining respite, eager for encounter, 
seeing (the fight between the Rakshasa and the monkey), 
wrought up with rage, said, — “It is not meet for me to attack 
Ravana— lord of Rakshasas — engaged with Nila.” And the 
highly powerful R&vana, by means of seven shafts with 
sharpened points, hit at the mountain-top ; and shivered in 
pieces, it fell (to the earth). And seeing that mountain peak 
shattered-, that general of the monkey-forces— ^slayer of hostile 
heroes— flamed up in wrath like the fire at the universal 
wreck. And in that encounter Nila discharged A^wakarna 
trees, and Salas, and mangoes in full flower, and various 
other trees. And Ravana, getting at the trees, severed them 
(by means of his arrows), and poured on the Fire-god’s son 
terrific showers of shafts. And assailed with fearful showers 
of arrows as with a mass of clouds, that one endowed with 
eminent strength, decreasing his dimensions, dropped on the 
' top of RSvana’s banner. And seeing the son of the Fire-god 
descend on the top of his banner, Ravana was fired with ire, 
and Nila shouted (thereat). And seeing the monkey (now) 
at the top of the banner, and (now) at the end of his bow, 
and (now) at the crest of his tiara, Lakshmana and Hanuman 
and Rama were struck with astonishment. And also Ravana 
endowed with exceeding energy, astonished at the lightness 
of the monkey, took up a wonderful flaming fiery weapon. 
And the monkeys seeing Ravana bewildered, and delighted 
thereat, set up shouts. And Ravana enraged at the shouts 
of the monkeys, with his heart overwhelmed with agitation, 
could not address himself to any affort. And then taking a 
fiery shaft and setting the same on his bow, the night-ranger 
161 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




iz8* 



RAMkYkNA . 



gazed at Nila. And the exceedingly energetic lord of the 
Rakshasas said, — “O monkey, by virtue of thy skill in 
illusion, thou art furnished with lightness. But, O monkey, 
if thou canst, preserve thy life. Thou transformest thyself 
into many shapes. Yet this shaft of mine discharged from 
my weapon, shall deprive of thy life thee that art preserving 
it.” Having said this, the mighty-armed Rivana — lord of the 
Rakshasas — fixing his shaft on his bow, shot it at the general. 
And Nila, struck at the chest with that arrow, which had been 
shot (by Havana), burning, suddenly fell down to the earth. 
And by virtue of the greatness of his sire and ateo of his own 
energy, he went to the earth on his knees, but was not 
utterly deprived of life. And seeing the monkey deprived 
of his senses, the Ten-necked one, eager for encounter, 
riding a car emitting a rattle resembling the rumbling of 
clouds, darted against Sumatra's son. And entering into the 
arena of fight and posted there flaming, the powerful lord of 
the Rakshasas, baffling (the foe), kept stretching his bow. 
And as that one of immeasurable prowess kept stretching his 
bow, Sumitra’s son of unflagging mettle, addressed him, 
saying, — “O lord of night-rangers, do thou to-day try me in 
encounter. Thou ought not to strive with the monkeys.” 
And hearing Saumitri’s speech uttered in a full voice, as well 
as the terrific twangs of his bow-string, that Raksha — the 
king — approaching Sumitra’s son staying in the field, spoke 
unto him wrathfully, — “O Raghu’s son, by my luck hast thou 
of perverse sense, finding thy fate come within the range 
of my ken. This very instant, tormented with the springes of 
my shafts, thou wilt repair to the regions of Death.” Thereat, 
Sumitra's son, without being overwhelmed with wonder (on 
witnessing RSvana’s prowess), addressed that one furnished 
with large and sharp teeth, — setting up roars, — “O king, 
those who are (really) endowed with prowess, do not storm. O 
prince of sinners, in vain thou vauntest. O lord of Rakshasas, 

I know thy prowess and strength and energy and vigor. Here 



Digitized by L-ooQle 



YVDDHARlNDAM. 



1283 



am I stationed, bow and shafts in hand. Come thou. What 
is the use of vain-glorious self-laudation ?” Thus accosted, 
the Raiksha monarch, growing wroth, discharged seven shafts 
furnished with knobs. Thereupon Lakshmana split them up 
with sharp-pointed arrows having variegated golden knobs. 
And they suddenly severed like powerful serpents cut off, 
Lanka’s lord came under the sway of passion, and discharged 
other whetted arrows. And R&mra’s younger brother poured 
showers of arrows from his bow ; and, planting himself at his 
post, cut off those arrows (of his adversary) by means of 
razors, and crescents, and excellent karnas and darts. And 
seeing his arrowy net-works rendered ineffectual, that enemy 
of the celestials — the king — was seized with wonderment, and 
again shot sharpened arrows. And Lakshmana also, resembling 
Indra the Great, setting on his bow sharpened, sharp*pointed, 
flaming, and luminous shafts, endowed with the dreadful 
vehement impetus of the thunder-bolt, discharged (them), to 
compass the destruction of the lord of Rakshas. And thereat 
the R&kshasa sovereign cut off those whetted arrows; and 
smote Lakshmana in the forehead with an arrow resembling 
the Fire of Dooms-day in energy, — which had been conferred 
on him by the Self-create. And Lakshmana, tortured with 
R&vana’s arrow, shook, loosely holding his bow; and then 
recovering his consciousness after undergoing extreme agony, 
he severed the bow of the foe of the foremost of celestials. 
And having cut off R&vana’s bow, Da5aratha’s son hit (him) 
with three sharp-pointed arrows. And the king smarting under 
the shafts, with much ado regained his consciousness. And 
the enemy of the immortals of terrific power with his bow 
severed, and himself hit with shafts, and his body covered 
with fat, and himself washed in blood, took up a dart conferred 
on him by the Self-create. And the sovereign of the 
R&kshasas and their lord in that encounter hurled at Sumitr&’s 
son the dart resembling smoking fire, sending up living 
flames, and striking terror into the monkeys. And as it coursed 



Digitized by 




1284 



RnM A r AN A. 



on, Bharata’s younger brother resisted it with arrows resembl- 
ing a sacrificial flame. Yet the dart pierced into the broad 
arm* of Da9aratha , s son. And smit with the dart, that hero 
of the Raghu race, although possessed of strength, was 
aglow. And the king at once with his arms seized that one, 
who had been deprived of his senses. But he that could with 
his arms wield Himavan or Mandara or Meru or the triple 
world itself along with the immortals, could not (for all his 
strength) lift up Bharata’s younger brother. And hit at his 
chest by the dart of Brahma, SumitrS’s son remembered that 
he was verily a portion, of Vishnu himself. And pressing hard 
Sumitra’s son — that humbler of the hauteur of the Daityas, 
that thorn in the sides of the celestials — could not move him 
(from his place). And then the Wind-god’s offspring waxing 
wroth rushed at Ravana, and overwhelmed with rage smote 
at his chest with his clenched fist resembling the thunder- 
bolt. And boxed (by Hanumanaj, R&vana — lord of the 
Rakshasas — wont down to the ground on his knees, and 
shook and dropped to the earth. And blood gushed out in 
streams from his mouths and eyes and arms ; and staggered 
anid senseless, he sat down on the platform of his car. And 
he was rendered insensible with his senses lost ; and he knew 
not where he was. And seeing Ravana endued with terrific 
prowess, rendered insensible in the encounter, saints and 
monkeys and gods with the Asuras set up shouts. And then 
the energetic Hanuman taking Lakshmana racked by Ravana, 
with his arms brought him before Raghava. And albeit 
incapable of being moved by the foes, (Lakshmana), on 
account of the friendship of the Wind-god’s offspring as well 
as the high reverence in which he was held by Hanuman, 
became extremely light to the monkey. And then that dart, 
renouncing Sumitra’s son vanquished in fight, again sought 
its place in R&vana’s car. And the exceedingly powerful 
Ravana, recovering his consciousness in that dread encounter, 

* Bhujdntaram is vague. It may also mean the chest. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YVDDHaKANDAM. 



1285 

took up whetted shafts and seized a mighty bow. And that 
finisher of foes — Lakshmana — recovered the exercise of his 
senses, and had his entire person perfectly healed, — on his 
recalling that he verily was a part and parcel of Vishnu 
himself. And witnessing the mighty army of the monkeys 
and the redoubted heroes brought down in the conflict, 
Raghava rushed at Ravana. Thereat drawing near to him, 
HanumSn said unto him, — “It behoveth thee to chastise the 
foe ascending my back, even as Vishnu chastiseth the 
enemies of the immortals, riding Garutman.” Hearing the 
words spoken by HanumSn, Raghava at once got up on that 
gigantic monkey ; and that master of men beheld Ravana in 
battle. And seeing him, that highly powerful one darted 
against Ravana, even as the enraged Vishnu had rushed 
against Virochana’s son* upraising his weapons. And he 
sharply twanged his bow-string sounding like the terrific 
crash of thunder; and then in solemn tones, Rama addressed 
the lord of Rakshasas, saying, — “Stay, stay, having done me 
such wrong. Repairing whither, shalt thou, O powerful 
Rakshasa, attain respite? Even if thou shouldst seek Yama 
or Indra or the Sun — son unto Viva$wan — or the Self-sprung 
or the Fire-god or Sankara himself, — or go to the ten cardi- 
nal points in ten portions, — yet shalt thou not, so resorting, 
attain deliverance. And (Lakshmana), going forth to the fight, 
hath been wounded with the dart and hath suddenly been stupi- 
fied. But, O king of the Rakshas, to-day in conflict Death shall 
claim for his own thee and thy sons and grandsons. By me 
with my shafts have been slaughtered four and ten thousand 
Rakshas residing in Janasthana, wielding excellent weapons.” 
Hearing Raghava’ s words, the exceedingly strong lord of the 
Rakshasas, overwhelmed with a mighty w^rath, recalling en- 
mity agone, with burning shafts resembling the fire of Doom 
hit in encounter the exceedingly impetuous offspring of the 
Wind-god, who was bearing Raghava. And although struck 

* The Asura — Vali. 



Digitized by k^ooQie 




it86 



RlMlFANA * 



and resisted by the R&kshasa with arrows, the energy of that 
one, endowed by nature with prowess— increased greatly. 
And the exceedingly energetic R&ma, on seeing that fore- 
most of the monkeys wounded by R&vana, was mastered by 
wrath. And R&ma, closing with his enemy, by means of 
whetted arrow-points severed in pieces his car together with 
the wheels and the steeds, the banner, the umbrella, and the 
majestic streamer, as well as with the charioteer and the 
thunder-bolts and darts and swords. And then as the reverend 
Indra cleaveth Meru with his thunder-bolt, (R&ghava) swiftly 
smote on R&vana* s spacious and shapely chest, with a shaft 
resembling Vajra and the thunder holt. And — that the king 
hero — who had not smarted nor shaken under the impetus 
of Vajra and the thunder-bolt, — assailed with the arrow of 
R&ma and agonised in consequence, shook and lost hold of 
his bow. And seeing him overwhelmed, R&ma took up a 
flaming half-moon, and with the same at once severed the 
sun-bright tiara of the high-souled sovereign of the R&kshasas. 
And R&ma in the encounter addressed the lord of R&kshasas, 
resembling a serpent bereft of venom, shorn of his splendour, 
like unto the sun shrouded (in mist),— without his wonted 
grace, and having his entire tiara riven — saying, — “Thou hast 
(in battle) performed high and dreadful deeds, — and hast also 
(in the conflict) slain my foreYnost heroes. And therefore I 
know thou art fatigued. And for this reason it is that I will 
not with my shafts bring thee to the door of Death. Go thou. 

I know* that thou art worn out with fight. Therefore, O king 
of night-rangers, enter Lanka. Having a little respite, do 
thou depart on thy car along with thy bowmen. Afterwards, 
mounted on thy car, shalt thou behold my power”. And 
thus addressed, the king, with his pride and joy defeated, 
with his bow severed, and his steeds and charioteer killed, 
himself smarting under shafts, — and having his crown splin- 

— -■ - - c 

* Jdndmi — lit. I know. The commentator says that here this word 
means I permit. But the literal sense answers. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDRARlNDAM . 



1287 



tered, — speedily entered Lanka. And on that foe of the 
deities and the Danavas — the puissant lord of the night- 
rangers— entering (into Lanka), Rama rendered the monkeys 
along with Lakshmana hale in that fierce conflict. And 
at the break-down of that foe of the immortals, the celestials 
and the Asuras, the ghosts and the Cardinal points,and all the 
mighty serpents together with the oceans and the creatures 
inhabiting earth and water, felt exceedingly delighted. 



SECTION LX* 



A.ND entering the city of Lanka, the king afflicted with 
the fear of Rama's arrows, with his pride humbled, was 
undergoing great torments. And overpowered by the high- 
souled Raghava, the king resembled an elephant defeated by 
a lion or a serpent defeated by Garura. And remembering 
Raghava's arrows resembling a comet risen at the universal 
wreck, and of the splendour of live lightning, the Rakshasa- 
chief was aggrieved. And seated on a superb golden 
seat, Rama, eying the Rakshasas, spoke, — ‘‘Forsooth all 
the austere asceticism I have performed goeth for 
nothing, for although resembling the redoubtable Indra, I 
have been overcome by a mortal. And this dire speech of 
Brahma also reverts to my remembrance,— ‘Know thou that 
thy fear cometh from a human being. Thou art incapable of 
being slain by deities and Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas, 
Rakshasas and serpents. But thou hast not asked for im- 
munity from men.' And I deem even this son of Da£aratha 
as the occasion of my fear. And I was formerly cursed by 
that lord of the Ikshwaku line — Anaranya— saying, — ‘O 
worst of Rakshasas, a person shall spring in my race, who, 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1288 



KAmA^A iVA. 



O wicked-mindeitl one, shall slay thee in battle along with 
thy sons and courtiers and forces and horses and charioteers/ 
And I was also cursed by Vedavati, who was formerly out- 
raged by me. And she is (perchance) born as the exalted 
daughter of Janaka. And what had also been uttered by Uma 
and Nandi$wara and RambhS. and Varuna's daughter,* hath 
come to pass.f And taking note of this, ye should strive 
(to the uttermost.) And let the Rakshasas be posted at the 
gateways, highways, and the walls. And do ye wake up that 
destroyer of the pride of the deities and the Danavas — 
Kumbhakarna, endowed with unparalleled gravity, overwhelmed 
with the curse of Brahma.” And seeing himself worsted and 
Prahastaalso slain, that Raksha endowed with dreadful power 
issued his orders to that fearful force. “Do ye vigilantly 
guard the gates and mount the wall. And do ye wake up 
Kumbhakarna come under the sway of slumber. And 
deprived of his senses through lust, he sleepeth secure. And 
the R&kshasa sometimes sleepeth nine, seven, ten, or eight 
months away. Of measureless might he hath slept for nine 
months. And foremost of all the Rakshasas in fight, that 
long-armed one shall speedily slay the monkeys as well as 
the princes. He is a very banner in battle, and the crown of 
all the Rakshas. But intent on common pleasure, Kubha- 
karna, with his senses stupified, sleepeth ever. 1 have been 
worsted in fierce fight by Rama ; but on Kumbhakarna being 
awakened, my grief shall go. If he doth not help me in such 
high peril, what shall I do with his strength resembling the 

* Punjikasthald. 

f Punjikasthald cursed Rdvana that he should come by death if he should 
use violence on a woman against her inclination. RcLvana had not been cursed 
by Rambhd herself, but by Nala Kuvera in her interest. ‘Thy head shall be 
sundered in seven when thou forcest a female against her will.’ Umd had 
cursed RcLvana that for a woman he should meet with death on the shaking of 
the peak of Kailua. — Nandi<pwara had cursed him that as he had slighted 
and scoffed at him, he should find his fate at the hands of the monkeys, being 
emanations of himself. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




y VDDH a kK nd A Af. 



1289 



strength of Sakra himself ?” Hearing the speech of 
the lord of the lUkshasas, the RSkshasas, bestirring them- 
selves, went to the abode of Kumbhakarna. And desired by 
RSvana, those feeding on flesh and blood went off hurriedly, 
taking perfumes and wreaths and a mass of food. And 
entering Kumbhakarna’s charming cave having a wide 
gateway, measuring a yoyana breathing around perfumes 
of flowers, — those highly powerful ones, pushed off by 
Kumbhakarna’ s breath, with the utmost energy they could 
summon up stood their ground and entered the cave. And 
then entering that charming cave having floors paved with 
gold and gems, those Nairitas endowed with great strength, 
saw that one of dreadful prowess, lying down. And then 
they together set about waking up the slumbering Kumbha- 
karna looking like a hill extended, — and sunk in profound 
slumber ; with his body having its down standing on end ; 
lying down ; like a sighing serpent ; rolling people* with his 
powerful breath, — reposing ; possessed of dreadful prowess ; 
having a huge nose ; of a person vast as the nether sphere ; 
lying stretched at length ; smelling of fat and blood ; decked 
with golden angadas ; and waring a diadem endowed with the 
splendour of the Sun. And (they) saw that subduer of 
enemies and foremost of Nairitas — Kumbhakarna. And then 
they piled up Meru-like animals for conferring rare gratifica- 
tion, and heaps of deer and buffaloes and boars. And the 
R&kshasas made an astounding heap of rice. And then the 
enemies of the immortals put up before Kumbhakarna jars of 
blood and various kinds of food, and smeared that repressor 
of foes with excellent sandal, and made him inhale perfumes 
and the aroma of wreaths. And they made (the place) rife 
with the incense of dhupa , and extolled that smiter of 
enemies. And then the YStudh&nas roared around here and 

* An instance of the material sublime unsurpassed in all literature. 
Kumbhakarna himself is the emblem of the material as contrasted with the 
spiritual typified by Rdma. — T. 

162 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





1290 



RAMkrkNA . 



there like clouds. And they winded conchs beaming 
moon-like. And they incapable of being beaten shouted 
in full chorus. And the night-rangers shouted and struck 
at their arms with their hands and began to pull him. 
And for rousing Kumbhakarna, mighty was the din that 
they raised. And hearing those loud sounds of conchs and 
drums and panavas ; and those proceeding from persons 
striking at their arms with their hands ; and leonine roars,— 
rushing on all sides and riving the very heavens, — birds 
suddenly dropped down. And when the high-souled Kumbha- 
karna sleeping soundly did not awake at that terrific tumult, 
the Rakshasas took up Bhushandis * and maces. And then 
the Rakshasas, drawing near, smote Kumbhakarna sleeping 
sweetly in the chest with mountain-peaks, maces and clubs. 
But the Rakshasas could not stay before Kumbhakarna owing 
to the hurricane heaving at his breath. Then tightening 
their clothf (about their waist), those Rakshasas of dreadful 
prowess sounded mridangas and panavas , conchs and 
kumbhas . And ten thousand Rakshasas together surrounded 
that one resembling a heap of dark-blue collyrium and fell 
to rousing him. But albeit assailed with shouts and smit 
with weapons, he did not wake up. And when they succeeded 
not in rousing him, they more than ever exerted themselves. 
And then they smote him with horses and camels, and mules 
and snakes, rods and lashes and hooks, and with might and 
main sounded kettledrums and conchs and mridangas . And 
they struck his body with innumerable huge blocks of 
wood. And summoning up their dearest energy, they dealt 
him blows with maces and clubs. And at that mighty uproar, 
entire Lank2l was filled with her woods and hills $ yet he 
did not wake up. And then they simultaneously sounded a 
thousand kettle-drums beaten with sticks of polished gold. 

* A variety of the mace. 

t Another reading is, Tatah prapuritdh gdrham—t\itn densely filling the 
cave. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



r li DDH A KXN DA M. 



I 29 t 

And coming under the sway of the curse,* when that one sunk 
in slumber'did not wake up, the night-rangers were wrought 
up with wrath. And overcome with choler, they endowed with 
dreadful prowess addressed themselves vigorously to awaken- 
ing him ; and others put forth their energy. And others smote 
the kettle-drums, and others set up loud cries. And others 
cut off his hair, and others bit his ears. And others poured 
into his ears a thousand vessels of water. But Kumbhakarna 
come under the spell of a mighty slumber did not wink. And 
others — strong ones — armed with poniards (kutas) and maces, 
made their poniards and maces alight on his person. And 
struck with satagknis bound with cords, t that huge-bodied 
one did not wake up. And then when a thousand elephants 
rushed against his body, recovering his consciousness, he 
awoke. And assailed with mountain-peaks and trees descending 
on his body, he, without minding those tremendous blows, — on 
sleep having been dispelled, suddenly got up, yawning,— 
suffering the pangs of hunger. And then that night-ranger 
resembling an elephant or a serpent or a mountain-peak, 
casting about his arms superior in force to the thunder-bolt 
itself, and opening his deformed mouth like unto that of a 
mule, yawned (again and again). And as he yawned, his 
mouth resembling the subterraneous regions, looked like the 
Sun stationed at the summit of Meru. And that night- 
ranger possessed of unwieldly strength woke up, yawning. 
And the breath that he breathed resembled a storm raging in 
a mountain. And then as he sat up, Kumbhakarna’s form 
appeared like that of the Destroyer himself at the universal 
wreck, — intent upon consuming all creatures. And the large 
eyes of that one, resembling a live flame and endowed with 
the splendour of lightning, appeared like a pair of glowing 
planets. And then they pointed unto him all those heaps of 

* Brahmi had cursed him, as will appear afterwards. — T. 
f What does this mean ? 



Digitized by 



1292 



RlMkVANA . 



edibles, various and profuse, — bears and buffaloes, — and that 
powerful (R&kshasa) fell to. And hungering, he fed on flesh 
and athirst, drank blood. And then that enemy of Sakra 
drauk vesselfuls of fat and blood. And concluding that he 
was replete, the night-rangers came up ; and bowing down 
their heads, stood circling him on all sides. And then with 
his eyes discolored and drooping from drowsiness, he casting 
his eyes around, addressed those night-rangers. And that 
foremost of Nairitas cheered all those Nairitas ; and surprised 
at his having been roused, — spoke unto the Rakshasas, — 
“Why, being honored, have I been awakened by you ? Is it 
well with the king? Or hath any fear sprung up here % Or 
hath a mighty fear presented itself forsooth from among 
others ; for which I have been speedily awakened by you ? 
This very day will I uproot quite the fear of the sovereign of 
the Rakshasas. I will split up the great Indra himself, — or 
make Fire himself give up his heat. One doth not awaken 
my like for a light cause. Therefore do ye give the real 
truth of the cause of your awakening me.” Thereat a 
minister of the king, named Yupaksha, with joined hands said 
unto that humbler of foes — Kumbhakarna — wrought up with 
wrath, who was thus speaking, — “No fear anywise springs to 
us from the Deities. But, O king, a great fear doth cross 
us, coming from a mortal. And never fear so cometh unto 
us anywise from Daityas or Danavas, as it hath arrived from 
a man, O king. This Lanka hath been hemmed in by 
monkeys resembling mountains. And terrific is the terror 
that cometh even from Rama scorched with fire springing 
from the ravishment of Sita. Ere this by a single monkey 
was this splendid city burnt down. And the prince Aksha 
hath been slain along with his following and elephants. And 
that thorn in the sides of deities, that lord of the Rakshasas — 
Pulasta's son himself — hath been set free in conflict by Raghava 
endowed with the splendour of the Sun, — saying — ‘Go thou.' 
And what had been done unto the king by neither the gods 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




rVDDHAKlNDAM. 



1293 

nor the Daityas nor yet the Danavas, hath been done 
by Rama ; and he hath been set free, having come to a pass 
imperilling his life.” Hearing Yupaksha’s speech and hearing 
of the defeat of his brother, Kumbhakarna, with his eyes 
whirling, spoke unto him, saying, — “To day, O Yupaksha, 
after vanquishing in battle the monkey-army together with 
Lakshmana and Raghava, shall I see R£vana. And I shall 
regale the Rakshasas with the flesh and blood of the monkeys, 
and mysdf drink the blood of R£ma and Lakshmana.” 
Hearing his words as he haughtily spoke thus with his spirit 
of insolence magnified by much, that foremost of the Nairita 
soldiers, Mahodara, with joined hands observed, — “O long- 
armed one, having at first heard Ravana's words and considered 
their justice or otherwise, thou wilt afterwards defeat the 
foe in fight.” Hearing Mahodara’s words, the exceedingly 
energetic and mighty (Kumbhakarna) surrounded by the 
R&kshasas, prepared to depart. And having roused from his 
slumbers that one of terrific prowess having dreadful eyes, — 
the R&kshasas speedily arrived at the residence of the 
Ten-necked one. And presenting themselves before the 
Ten-necked one seated on a superb seat, all the night-rangers 
spoke with joined hands,— “O lord of the Rakshasas, thy 
brother, Kumbhakarna, hath been roused. Shall he march 
from there; or wilt thou see him come here ?” Thereat, 
R&vana, pleased, spoke unto those Rakshasas who had 
presented themselves, — “I wish to see him here, and do ye 
honor him fittingly.” Thereat, saying ‘So be it', the Rakshasas, 
directed by R£vana, going back, spoke unto Kumbhakarna, — 
“That foremost of all the R&kshasas — the king — wisheth to 
see thee. So mind thou going, and gladden thy brother.” 
And the irrepressible Kumbhakarna possessed of prodigious 
prowess, learning the mandate of his brother, saying, — ‘So 
be it/ — rose up from his bed. And washing his face, and 
having bathed, that one, feeling refreshed and enjoying 
exceeding exhilaration of spirit, — wishing to drink, urged (the 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1294 



RAmA VAN a. 



Rakshasas) to bring the nerve-conferring draught. And then 
the Rakshasas, at the command of RSvana speedily procured 
wine and various kinds of viands. And having drunk two 
thousand vessels (of wine), he prepared to go. And slightly 
swolen and flushed, Kumbhakama, attaining access of strength 
and fire, waxed wroth, and resembled the Doom and Destroyer 
— Yama himself. And striding to the residence of his 
brother backed by the Raksha force, Kumbhakarna shook 
the earth with his tread. And illuming the highway with 
the splendour of his person, like the thousand* rayed (Sun) 
discovering the earth with his rays, (Kumbhakarna) went on, 
engirt around by joined hands resembling wreaths,— like 
Satakratu* going to the abode of the Self-sprung. And 
suddenly seeing that slayer of foes of immeasurable 
prowess, resembling a mountain-summit, — walking along 
the highways, the wood-rangers stationed outside ( the 
monkey-camp), along with the leaders of bands, were seized 
with affright. And then some sought the shelter of R&ma, 
worthy of being so sought ; and some, stricken (with panic), 
dropped to the earth ; and some, suffering (from fear), fled to 
the carindal points ; and some through stress (of apprehen- 
sion) lay down on the ground. And seeing that one 
resembling a very mountain-peak, decked with a diadem, 
seeming to touch the Sun himself with his energy, of colossal 
altitude, and wonderful to behold, — the wood-rangers, tor- 
mented with fright, began to scamper on all sides. 



* Lit. him of an hundred sacrifices — an appellatiou of Indra. — T. 



Digitized by 





Y VDDHa KIND A M. 



1195 



SECTION LX I ' 



A.ND then the exceedingly energetic Rama possessed of 
prowess, taking his bow, saw Kumbhakarna, having a huge 
body and decked with a diadem. And seeing that foremost of 
R&kshasas looking like a mountain ; filling all the heavens as 
formerly Narayana had done ; resembling clouds charged w ith 
rain ; and adorned with golden angadas t — the mighty army of 
monkeys began to run away at the top of its speed. 
Seeing the army scamper and the Raksbasa swelling, R&ma 
struck with surprise, said unto Bibhishana,— “Who is that 
tawney-eyed one, decked with a diadem, and looking like a 
hill ? And in Lank£ the hero appeareth like a mass of clouds 
embosoming lightning. And alone he seemeth like an ensign 
of the Earth ; and seeing him the monkeys dart away hither and 
thither. Tell me who he is, — whether a Raksha or an Asura. 
The like of him mine eyes had never before lighted on.” 
Accosted by the king’s son — Rama of untiring deeds — the 
exceedingly wise Bibhishana said unto Kakutstha, — “By w hom 
in battle Vivas9wata’s offspring* and Vasava himself had been 
vanquished, this is he — the wondrous powerful Kumbhakarna 
— son unto Vi9ravan. No R&kshasa is there that equalleth this 
one in size. O Raghava, this one in battle hath brought down 
D&navas and Yakshas and Serpentsf and flesh-feeders and 
Gandharvas and Vidyadharas and PannagasJ by thousands. 
The immortals themselves thinking the dart-handed and fierce- 
eyed Kumbhakarna possessed of great strength, as the Des- 
troyer himself, — were overwhelmed with stupor and were 
foiled in their exertions to slay him. The exceedingly power 
ful Kumbhakarna is mighty by nature : the strength of other 

* Yama — son of Viva9wata or the Sun. 

t Bhujangdh : — semi-divine serpents. 

% Semi-divine serpents. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





1296 



jiAMA r AN A . 



redoubtable R&kshasas is owing to boons obtained by them. 
As soon as this high-souled one was born and was a babe, he 
began to devour up countless creatures by the thousand. 
And on these having been devoured, creatures, afflicted with 
affright consequent on those having been eaten up, sought 
the shelter of Sakra and told him what had happened. And 
thereat the great Indra, waxing wroth, smote Kumbhakarna 
with the whetted levin. And hit at with Sakra’s thunder- 
bolt, that high-souled (hero, shook, and in wrath set up roars. 
And hearing the roars of the R£kshasa — Kumbhakarna — as 
he kept crying, creatures, seized with fear, were greatly 
agitated. And thereat, enraged with the great Indra, the 
mighty Kumbhakarna plucking a tusk of Airavata, hurled it 
at Vasava’s chest. And with blood overflowing his person, 
Vasava looked as if aflame. And thereat, all of a sudden the 
gods and the Brahmarshis and the D&uavas were dispirited. 
And then they informed the lord of creatures touching the 
ravages of Kumbhakarna, and informed the gods about 
Kumbhakarna’s devouring up creatures, destroying asylums 
and outraging others* wives. ; ‘If this one devour creatures 
constantly, in a short space the world would be empty of 
any.” Hearing Vasava’s speech, the Great-father of all 
called up* the R&kshasas and saw Kumbhakarna (before him). 
And seeing Kumbhakarna, Prajapatif was seized with 
exceeding great fear. And then, pacifying Kumbhakarna, 
the Self-sprung addressed him, saying, — ‘ Forsooth for com- 
passing the destruction of creatures, hast thou been begot by 
Paulasta.J Therefore from this day forth, thou shalt lie down 
as one dead.”' Stricken with the curse of BrahmS, Kumbha- 
karna fell down before the Lord. Then, extremely agitated, 
E£vana said, — ‘‘Thou hewest down a golden tree when about 
to bear fruit. O lord of creatures, thou ought not to curse 

* By reciting a certain scriptural formula. — T. 

f Lit. — lord of creatures . 

X Vi9rav£. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDHAKkNDAM . 



1297 



thus thine own grandson. Thy words will never go for 
naught ; sleep he will, without doubt. But do thou appoint 
a time for his sleeping and one for his awaking.” Hearing 
Ravana’s speech, the Self-sprung said, — “Having slept for 
six months, he shall wake for one day. And for a 
single day, that hero, coming under the influence of hunger, 
shall range the earth, opening his mouth wide open, and 
devouring people like a fire that hath spread far and 
wide. And now king Ravana struck with terror at thy 
prowess, encompassed with peril, bath waked up Kumbha- 
karna. And that hero possessed of dreadful prowess, 
wrought up with high wrath, sallying forth from his 
camp, rusheth about, eating up monkeys. And soon as the 
monkeys see Kumbhakarna, they fly away. And How 
can they resist in battle the enraged Kumbhakarna ? Do 
thou tell the monkeys this is an uplifted engine. Thus 
assured, the monkeys shall take heart.” Hearing Bibhishatia’s 
words informed with reason and tending to the good (of the 
monkeys), Raghava then addressed general Nila, saying, — 
“Let you, monkeys, equipped with weapons and holding hill- 
tops in your hands, — and furnished with mountain-summits 
and trees and rocks, stay, occupying the highways and the 
bridges.” Thus instructed by Raghava, that powerful 
monkey, Nila — general of the forces — accordingly issued his 
orders to the monkey-hosts. And then Gavaksha and Sarabha 
and Hanuman and Angada, themselves endowed with the 
splendour of mountain-summits, taking up mountain-tops, 
drew towards the gateway. And hearing Rama’s words,* the 
heroic monkeys inspired with intrepidity, fiercely fell on the 
foe with trees. And then that dreadful army of monkeys, 
upraising crags and holding trees in their hands, appeared 
like mighty masses of scowling clouds bordering a mountain. f 

♦ Namely, “that is an uplifted engine.” 

t This is apt, seeing that Lankd was situated on a hill. — T. 



163 



Digitized by 




1298 



RlMlYANA . 



SECTION L X 1 1 . 



.A.ND that tiger-like R&kshasa possessed of prowess, 
(still) under the influence of slumber, strode along the pictur- 
esque highway. And that exceedingly unconquerable one, 
surrounded by thousands of R&kshasas, went on, showered 
with blossoms from the houses (standing by). And then he 
saw the grand and graceful residence of the lord of the 
R&kshasas, having golden networks and sun-bright to behold. 
And entering the mansion of the Rakshasa sovereign, like 
the sun entering into a mass of clouds, he saw his elder brother 
seated at a distance ; even as Sakra sees the Self-sprung 
seated. And Kumbhakarna surrounded by numbers of 
Rakshasas, entered his brother’s abode, making the very earth 
tremble with his tread. And arriving at the abode and 
passing the entrance, he saw his superior anxiously seated on 
the car, Pusphaka. Seeing Kumbhakarna come, the Ten- 
necked one, exceedingly rejoiced, raised him up and drew 
him near himself. And then the exceedingly mighty 
Kumbhakarna saluted the feet of his brother and said,— “What 
dost thou say ?” Thereat, delighted, R&vana, springing up, 
again embraced (his brother). And embraced (by his brother), J 
and duly greeted by him, that brother (of Ravana)— 
Kumbhakarna seated himself on a shining and superb seat. 
And seating himself on that seat, the wondrous powerful 
Kumbhakarna, with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed 
Ravana, saying, — “O king, why, honoring me, hast thou 
awaked me ? Tell me, whence springeth thy fear ? And 
who shall be a ghost?”* Thereat, Ravana, waxing wroth, 
and with his eyes rolling in rage, said unto Kumbhakarna, 
seated, — “O highly powerful one, thou hast slept away a long 

* Having been slain by me. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





ylddhakXnda m. 



1*99 



space of time. And having been asleep, thou dost not know 
the great fear of mine springing from R£ma. This graceful 
son unto Da^aratha possessed of strength, along with 
Sugriva, having crossed the ocean, is destroying our race. 
Alack ! see in own LankS, woods and forests have been 
flooded with an ocean of monkeys coming without any ado 
by the bridge (which they have constructed). Those 
Rakshasas that were prime, have been slain in battle by the 
monkeys ; but I find no destruction of the monkeys in fight. 
Nay, the monkeys have never been before even vanquished* 
(by the Rakshasas) in battle. And therefore hath this fear 
sprung up (in my heart). Save me from this, O exceedingly 
powerful one. Do thou now destroy these. It is for this 
that I have roused thee. Do thou, favoring me, whose 
exchequer is empty, save this city of Lank&, having only 
young folks and the aged left. And, O long-armed one, do 
thou perform thy dearest acts in behalf of thy brother. And, 
O subduer of enemies, I had never before said so unto my 
brother. In thee is my affection and great is the probability 
of thy succeeding. In the wars of the celestials and Asuras, 
O foremost of Rakshasas, countless were the celestials that 
thou as an antagonist hadst beaten. Therefore, O thou of 
dreadful strength, summon thy entire energy. Him find I not 
among all beings, who is thy peer in prowess. And, O lover 
of battle ! O dear unto friends, as thou likest, do this beloved 
good office, this prime benefit, unto me. By thy own energy, 
smite the hostile hosts, even as a mighty and strong wind 
(scattereth away) autumnal clouds. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




i3°o 



KAajA VAN a. 



SECTION LXIII. 



Hearing the lament of the king of Rakshasas, 
Kumbhakarna, laughing, said, — “That evil which on the 
occasion of the conclave we had seen, hath befallen thee, who 
hast passed by what was fraught with thy good. Even as a 
sinner reapeth perdition, verily hath the fruit of thine 
unrighteous act found thee. At first, O mighty king, thou 
didst not pouder over this course of conduct ; nor, from pride 
of prowess, didst thou at all take note of the evil thereof. 
He that doeth last what should be done first, and first what 
should be done last, is ignorant of what is prudence and what 
not. Acts not performed in harmony with season and place, 
like unto acts performed counter to season and place, are the 
occasions of misery, and resemble clarified butter poured 
into fire that hath not been sanctified. He stayeth well in 
the path that, in consultation with his counsellors, ascertaineth 
the five ways touching the three kinds of action.* The king 
that aided by his own intelligence as well as his counsellors 
acteth after reflection in consonance with the science of 
polity, that distinguished! his friends from his foes), and, O 
lord of the Rakshasas, that seasonablyT pursueth righteous- 
ness, or profit, or desire, — or any two, or all these combined, 
— truly hath understanding. { But the king or the heir- 

* The five ways are (i) the means of commencing an act (2) person, thing 
and wealth, (3) division of season and place, (4) providing against mischance, 
(5) success. The three kinds of action are treaty, war, etc. All this is 
nebulous ; and the commentator is sadly reticent over this extremely important 
passage. — T. 

f Religion is to be sought in the morning, profit in the afternoon, and 
desire at night, — so the commentator. — T. 

X One is at sea in the midst of these formless generalities. The tantalized 
intellect makes a desperate attempt to grasp the body of the shadow seeming 
substance, but the empty air mocks his pains. A translator, however, is fast 
bound to the oar and must pull on, will be, nil he. — T 



Digitized by 




yuddhakKndam . 



1301 

apparent, that, having heard what is prime among the three, 
doth not understand, hath spent his time in vain on his 
erudition. He that, controlling his own self, consulteth 
with his counsellors seasonably touching gift, forbearance, 
difference and prowess, as well as virtue, profiit and desire, — 
doth not in this world come by calamity. Perceiving the fair 
fruit (of a line of action) accruing to him here, a king should 
act in consultation with counsellors endowed with intelli- 
gence and versed in the import of things. Not understand- 
ing the sense of the scriptures, persons possessed of beastly 
intelligence, —entering into the heart of their counsellors,— 
are inspired with a desire of speaking out of sheer volubility.* 
Albeit uttered heedfully, the speech of those that are ignorant 
of learning and the knowledge of the sense of things, — and 
who are intent upon attaining abounding affluence, — should 
not be acted upon. And those — spoilers of business — who 
from recklessness talk of pernicious as if profitable, — should 
certainly be rejected as counsellors. Some counsellors — 
destroyers of their masters — joining intelligent enemies (of 
their lords), act in a way opposed to their interests in this 
world. Their lords, at the hour of consultation, by their 
behaviour should know these counsellors — enemies in the 
guise of friends — who have been won over (by the opposite 
party). Even as the fowls of the air enter the hole in the 
Krauncha.t enemies find an easy entrance into the short- 
comings of him that is ficklej and that rusheth into act 
without heed. He that disregarding his foe, omitteth to 
guard himself, cometh by disasters andloseth his place. Even 
what had been advanced by thy beloved§ and my younger 

* The sense is obscure, and the commentator does not help me. — T. 

t The hole indented by Skanda the celestial generallissimo in the mountain 
named in the text. — T. 

J Chapala— fickle. The commentator, however, reads between the lines. 
According to him the epithet means — he that is pleased •Kith speech immediately 
agreeable. But the received sense answers. — T. 

§ R^vana’s principal queen, Mandodari. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





I3°2 



RaM a r AN a. 



brother, is fraught with our welfare. Do thou now what thou 
wishest.” Hearing Kumbhakarna’s words, the Ten-necked 
one knit up Jiis brows, and, wrought up with wrath, said 
unto him, — ‘‘I am worthy of being honored by thee, like thy 
superior. What needs this verbal travail ? Do thou what is fit. 
Vain is the mention now of what I did either through stupor 
or delusion or pride of prowess. Now bethink thee of what 
is proper. Do thou through thy prowess assuage the sorrow 
of mine springing from my impolitic conduct, if thou cherishest 
any feeling for me, if thy strength stayeth.and if thou deemest 
this business of mine as by far more momentous unto thee. 
He is a friend that succoureth one fallen in distress and is 
undergoing affliction ; and he acts friendly that helpeth a 
person lapsing from the path of morality.” As he was 
speaking thus in words sedate yet severe, Kumbhakarna, con- 
cluding that Ravana was delighted, made his remarks mildly. 
And seeing his brother extremely sorry, Kumbhakarna, 
pacifying him, gently said, — “O king, intently hear my words, 
O repressor of foes ! O lord of Rakshasas, banish this 
sorrow, and casting away thy wrath, return thou to nature. 
And, O king, so long as I live, thou must not suffer thy heart 
to fare thus. Him will I slay for whom thou grievest. But 
whatever condition thou mayst be in, I must tell what is for 
thy welfare ; and therefore from sentiment of friendship as 
well as from fraternal affection I have spoken thus unto thee, 
O king. And what a friend from affection should do at a 
time like this, I shall do the same. See the havock I spread 
among the foes in fight. And, O long-armed one, behold, on 
R&ma having been slain by me on the edge of battle along 
with his brother, the monkey-army in headlong flight. And 
to-day seeing Rama’s head brought by me from the field, be 
thou, O long-armed one, happy; and let Sita be overwhelmed 
with woe. And let those Rakshasas in Lanka who have had 
their kindred slain (in battle), see that dear sight — Rama 
slain (in fight;. And to-day shall I slaying the enemies in 



Digitized by 




YVDDH A KlNDAM. 



1303 

battle, wipe the tears of those who mourn their friends slain 
and are overwhelmed with grief. To-day behold the lord of 
monkeys — Sugriva — resembling a mountain or a mass of 
clouds lighted up by (the living) sun, — lying stretched on the 
field. But why, O sinless one, albeit comforted by these 
R&kshasas eager for slaying Da^aratha’s son, as well as by 
me, — dost thou persist in thy sorrow ? Raghava forsooth 
shall slay thee after slaying me. But, O lord of Rakshasas, 

I cannot come by grief* (at RAghava’s hands). O repressor 
of foes, do thou now command me, O thou of unparalleled 
prowess, thou needst not thyself face the foe in fight. I shall 
abolish thy foes endowed with redoubted might. If even 
Sakra himself, and Yama, and the god of Fire, and the god 
of Wind, and Kuvera, and Varuna — shall range themselves 
against me, them shall I encounter in fight. Purandara 
himself is seized with fright at sight of me, having a body 
measuring a mountain, — equipped with sharpened spears, — 
furnished with sharp teeth,— and setting up shouts. And who 
wishing to save himself shall be able to stay before me as I 
casting away my weapons keep pounding my enemies with 
celerity ? No need of the dart, or the mace, or the sword, or 
whetted arrows. 1 shall with my bare arms alone slay (Rama) 
along with the thunderer himself. If Righava bear the impetus 
of my blows, then shall the vollies of my shafts drink his life- 
blood. Why, O king, while I remain, dost thou burn in 
anxiety ? And I am ready to sally out for compassing the 
destruction of thine enemies. Cast off all terror of R£ma. I 
shall slay in battle R&ghava and Lakshmana and the exceeding- 
ly powerful Sugriva and the Raksha-destroying Hanum&n, 
who made Lanka blaze. I shall eat up the monkeys present 
in the encounter. And signal is the celebrity that I shall 
confer on thee. And, O king, if thy fear springs from Indra 

* Santdpam gachchheyam — come by grief. According to the commentator 
santdpa means fear ; and the sense is : / entertain no fear (on account of 
Rdma.J.—T, 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





I3°4 



R aMAKANa. 



or the Self-create, even the immortals shall measure their 
lengths on the earth when I am wrought with rage. And I 
shall subdue Yama himself and devour the God of Fire. And 
I shall bring down the very welkin garnished with stars. And 
I shall slay Satakratu and drink up the abode itself* of 
Varuna. And I shall crush the mountains and rive the earth. 
And to-day let all creatures as they are being eaten up, 
witness the prowess of Kumbhakarna, after he hath slept for 
a long time. Even the celestial regions do not suffice for me 
as my fare. I go for securing felicity ushuring in pleasures 
plenteous flowing from the destruction of Dayaratha’s son. 
And slaying Rama along with Lakshmana, I shall eat up all 
the foremost of monkey-bands.* Make merry, my king ; to-day 
drink Varuni. Enjoy pleasures, banishing sorrow. And 
to-day on my having despatched Rama to the mansion of 
Yama, Sita shall come under thy control for good.” 



section lxiv. 

Hearing the speech of the huge-bodied, long-armed and 
mighty Kumbhakarna, Mahodara said, — “O Kumbhakarna, 
although sprung in a noble line, thou art wondrous haughty 
and of a vulgar form ; and thou art not everywhere 
competent to discern thy course. It certainly cannot well 
be that the king cannot distinguish between proper and 
improper ; but thou hast from thy youth upwards been insolent ; 
and thy joy is in talking perenially. But the foremost of 
the Rakshasas is versed in place and increase and injury, — 
and knoweth the duties touching season and place, — and how 
to advance his own party and lower that of the foe. But what 

* Ocean. 



Digitized by 





VUDDHA KANDA M. 



*305 



person ever acteth according to what is proposed feebly* by 
one having strength, yet of inferior intelligence, and who 
hath never respected the aged ? And thou art not naturally 
competent to understand what thou thyself sayest touching 
the opposed virtue, profit and desire. Verily action is the 
spring of all agencies of happiness or misery ; and it is only 
those that act either well or ill. that reap the results of their 
acts. Virtue, t and interestj bring about emancipation as 
well as heaven and prosperity. But evil cometh from 
unrighteousness and harms spring therefrom. § People reap 
the fruit of their acts in this world or the next ; but the fruit 
of desire is reaped readily. Therefore should a king set about 
attaining his desire. And this also had we advised thee with 
our soul. And what is the harm that one should display his 
prowess before a foe ? Dost thou show the reasons for thy 
taking the field alone ? But I shall point thee out what is 
improper and unreasonable in this (proposed) course. How 
shalt thou alone vanquish that R§ghava who formerly routed 
in Janasthana innumerable RSLkshasas possessed of exceeding 
strength ? Dost thou not to-day in the palace behold those 
prowerful RSLkshasas that had been beaten in JanasthSna, — 
cowed down in fear ? Alas ! thou wishest to awake R^ma,— 
son unto Da^aratha — knowing full well that he resembles an 
enraged lion or a sleeping serpent. But whom doth it behove 

* Vaktum agakyam — incapable of saying. But what sense can be attached 
to — “What man acteth according to what is not advanced by one having 

strength aged ?” I therefore venture to render the passage — - feebly 

Proposed — i.e. proposed with vascillation or half-heartedly . — T. 

t The maxims enunciated by this counsellor are hardly all of a piece. 
The text may have been tampered with. — T. 

J Artha means sacrifices, gifts, &c., which are capable of being performed 
with wealth. ‘Sacrifice, gift, and asceticism purify the pious.* The Lord’s 
word. — T. 

$ Dharma t remarks RAmanuja, is here used for contemplation and recitation 
of scriptural formula performed without regard to happiness as the fruit of 
those actions. This is what hath been termed nishkdm dharma — disinterested 
piety. — T. 

164 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1306 



r Am Ay a /vj . 



to confront him ever flaming in energy, difficult of being 
approached when enraged, — and unbearable even like Death 
himself ? On approaching the foe, this whole host itself shall 
be imperilled ; and therefore, my child, thy marching alone 
doth nowise recommend itself to me. Who is there that, albeit 
weak bent on renouncing his life, wisheth to bring under 
subjection a foe that is powerful, — as if he would act with 
reference to one that is inferior ? O foremost of Rakshasas, 
why dost thou wish to fight with him whose peer there is 
none among men, and who is equal to Indra and Viva 9 wata 
himself ?” Having said this unto Kumbhakarna wrought up 
with wrath, Mahodara addressed that destroyer of creatures — 
Ravana — in the midst of the Rakshasas, — “Having already 
obtained Vaidehi, why dost thou delay ? If thou wishest it, 
Sita shall come under thy control. I have perceived a way 
as to how Sita may smile upon thee. Do thou listen 3 and 
should it please thee, act thou accordingly. Do thou proclaim 
it about that I and Dwijibha and Sanhradi, and Kumbhakarna 
and Vitardana — these five — are marching for compassing the 
destruction of R5ma. And we, marching out, shall battle 
with Rama, putting forth our uttermost. And if w r e succeed 
in securing victory, no expedient need we resort to (or 
bringing Sita round;. But if our foe live after fight and we 
also having faught the fight, then shall we do what I conceive 
in my mind. We shall come hither from the field, bathed in 
blood, and having our bodies cleft with arrows marked with 
the name of Rama. And we shall give out that both Rama 
and Lakshmana have been eaten up by us. And then we 
shall hold thy feet, saying, — ‘Do thou gratify us.’ Then, 0 
king, do thou through Gajaskandha publish it all round that 
Rama hath been slain along with his brother and the army. 
And, O repressor of foes, (pretending to be) w r ell pleased, do 
thou dispense — viands, and servants, and objects of enjoy- 
ments, and wealth unto thy retainers ; and unto the many 
heroes and warriors distribute wreaths and attires and 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDHAKlNDAM. 



1307 



unguents. And do thou (simulating) delight, drink. And on 
this report— name that Rama hath been eaten up by the 
Rakshasas along with his friends, — having spread round and 
round and entering (the a$oka wood), and soothing and 
pacifying Sita in solitude, allure her with corn and riches and 
gems. By this deceit, O king, working powerfully through 
Sita’s sorrow, she, albeit unwilling, shall, having lost her lord, 
come under thy control. Losing her charming husband, she 
from despair and female frailty, shall come under thy sway. 
Having formerly been brought up in happiness, she, although 
worthy of felicity, (ultimately) had come by misfortune. And 
now finding happiness to be in thy custody, she shall 
unreservedly come over to thee. In my opinion this is the 
properest course to follow. As soon as thou seest Rama, 
evil shall befall thee. Remain here. Do not wish (to go to 
the field). By refraining from fight, thou shalt acquire great 
good. And, O lord of people, by conquering the foe. without 
battle, thou without losing thy forces and putting thyself to 
peril, thou, O lord of earth, shalt attain fame and high reli- 
gious merit, and prosperity and renown for ever and for ever. 



SECTION LXV. 



Thus addressed, Kumbhakarna rebuking Mahodara, said 
unto that foremost of Rakshasa — his brother — Havana, — 
“Even I shalt remove thy great fear by slaying the wicked- 
minded R&ma. On thy foe having been slain, attain thou 
ease. It is not for naught that the heroes roar, like unto 
clouds containing no rain.* Behold thou, their roaring 
resulting in action in the field ! Heroes do not vaunt ; but 

* i. e. autumnal clouds and which roar but do not pour. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1308 



ramXvana . 



without boasting of their prowess in speech, they perform feats 
difficult of being achieved. O Mahodara, what thou sayest 
is ever acceptable only to kings that are incompetent, and 
foolish, pluming themselves on their knowledge. All the 
affairs of the monarch have been wrecked by you — cravens in 
fight, — sleek-tongued, — following the king (fawning) ye have 
made Lanka contain only the king, the treasury is lean ; 
^ and the forces have been slain. By the king ye have done 
like foes in the guise of friends. For repairing in mighty 
conflict the wrong that ye have perpetrated, I am about to 
set out for battle for routing the enemy. ” Thus addressed 
by the intelligent Kumbhakarna. the lord of R&kshasas, 
laughing answered, — “Sure this Mahodara is affrighted at 
Rama. And therefore, my child, O thou versed in warfare, 
he doth not relish battle. Like thee have I none either in 
friendship or strength. Therefore, O Kumbhakarna, go for 
destroying the foe and securing celebrity. I have waked thee 
up that wast lying down, in order that thou mightst destroy 
the enemy. O subduer, of foes, perilous is the time for the 
R&kshasas. Go forth, grasping thy spear, like the noose- 
handed Destroyer himself. Do thou devour up the monkeys 
as well as the princes possessed of the energy of the Sun 
himself. On seeing thy form, the monkeys shall flee away ; 
and the breasts, of R&ma and Lakshmana shall be riven.” 
Having spoken thus unto Kumbhakarna endowed with 
prodigious might, that foremost of Rakshasas— the exceed- 
ingly energetic R^vana — felt as if he had received life over 
again. And well acquainted with Kumbhakarna's might, and 
knowing his prowess, the king felt delighted, like the 
cloudless Moon.” Having been thus accosted, that highly 
powerful one, went out cheerfully* And hearing the king's 
speech, he made ready for fight. And he took a whetted 
dart, destructive to foes on account of its impetuous 

* He did not, however go yet awhile. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YVDDHA KlNDARi. 



1309 

vehemence ; entirely made of black iron ; flaming ; decorated 
with garniture, of shining gold ; looking like Indra’s agani ; 
ponderous as the thunder-holt ; capable of destroying gods 
and D&navas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Pannagas ; adorned 
with festoons of crimson flowers $ and belching forth flames. 
And taking that huge dart decked with the blood of foes ; 
the wondrous energetic Kumbhakarna spoke unto R&vana, 
saying, — “1 shall go alone : let this mighty host remain here. 
To-day hungry and enraged, I shall devour up the monkeys. 
Hearing Kumbhakarna* s words, Ravana said, — “Go thou, 
surrounded by the forces bearing darts and maces in their 
hands. The monkeys are high-souled, heroic and well-skilled 
in battle ; and if they find thee alone or unwary, they may 
slay thee with their teeth. Therefore do thou exceedingly 
irrisistible, go, environed by the forces ; and destroy the 
entire party of the foes, who are bent upon doing harm unto 
the Rakshas.” Then starting up from his seat, the exceed- 
ingly energetic R&vana hung on Kumbhakarna's neck a 
wreath stringed with gems in the centre. And R&vana 
also decked that high-souled one with angadas , and finger- 
fences, and noble ornaments, and a chain resembling the 
Moon. And R&vana adorned his person with garlands 
gorgeous and fragrant, and set ear-rings to his ears. And 
adorned with golden angadas and Keyuras and other 
ornaments of gold, the large-eared Kumbhakarna appeared 
like a fire fed full of 'sacrificial libations. And with his great 
dark girdle he seemed like the Mandara fastened by the 
serpent on the occasion of the churning of the # sea. And 
donning on his impenetrable golden mail, splendid like lightn- 
ing, and shining in its own brilliance, Kumbhakarna appeared 
like the monarch of mountains enveloped with evening clouds. 
Having all his limbs adorned with ornaments, and bearing a 
dart in his hand, the R&kshasa resembled N&r&yana in elation 
of spirits, when he covered heaven and earth and the nether 
regions with three paces. And then embracing his brother 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




IJIO 



RAmAVaNA. 



and going round him and bowing down the head unto him, 
that exceedingly powerful one went out. And Ravana sent 
him with choice benedictions, — while he caused kettle-drums 
and conchs to be sounded and forces equipped with excellent 
weapons, to accompany Kumbhakarna. And high-souled 
mighty warriors followed that foremost of heroes with 
elephants and steeds and chariots sending out rattle resembl- 
ing the rumbling of thunder. And mounting serpents and 
camels and asses and lions and leopards and deer and birds, 
(Rakshasas) followed the grim Kumbhakarna endowed with 
tremendous strength. And strewn with blossoms, and, with 
an umbrella held over him, that exceedingly terrible enemy 
of the Deities and the DSnavas, wielding a dart in his hand, 
— went out, maddened with the smell of blood. And 
countless footmen wondrous powerful and mighty and dreadful 
and fierce-sighted Rakshasas, carrying weapons in their hands, 
went in his wake. The Rakshas measuring each many a 
vyama and red, eyed, and resembling masses of dark-blue 
collyrium, — went out upraising darts and swords and 
sharpened axes and bhindipdlas and parighas and maces and 
huge talaskandhas and irrisistible Kshapanis . And the 
exceedingly energetic Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious 
strength sallied forth, assuming another form terrific and 
dreadful to behold. And the gigantic huge-faced and fierce 
Kumbhakarna, measuring an hundred bows in breadth and 
six hundred in altitude, having eyes resembling car-wheels, 
and resembling a towering hill, or a mountain burnt, — 
marshalling the Rakshas, said with a complacent countenance, 
— “Like fire consuming insects, shall I to-day, wrought up 
with wroth, burn up one by one the bands of the flower of 
the monkey-forces. But the wood-ranging monkeys have 
not transgressed anywise unto the like of us. That species 
is the ornament of the gardens attached to our residences. 
The cause of the seige of the city is Raghava along with 
Lakshmana. He being slain, all are slain. Therefore shall 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




Y UDI)HA A'i NDA M 



3 1 1 



I slay him in battle.'* As the Rakslia — Kumbhakarna — was 
speaking thus, the Rakshasas sent up terrific shouts, as if 
making the very sea shake. As the intelligent Kumbhakarna 
sallied out speedily, dreadful were the omens that presented 
themselves on all sides. Clouds containing meteors and 
lightning looked dark like asses. And the earth shook with 
her oceans and woods. And fierce jackals began to cry, 
opening their flaming mouths. And birds began to wheel at 
the left. And as he marched a vulture alighted on his dart. 
And bis left eye throbbed and his left arm shook. And a 
meteor dropped down with a tremendous crash. And the 
sun was bedimmed, and the air did not blow, enhancing 
pleasure. But without heeding these mighty omens that 
took place, capabale of making people's down stand on end, 
Kumbhakarna went out, urged on by the force of the Finisher. 
And leaping over the wall with his legs, that one resembling 
a mountain saw the wonderful array of the monkeys, 
resembling clouds. And seeing that foremost of Rakshasas 
resembling a hill, the monkeys began to disperse in all the 
ten cardinal directions like clo'uds driven by the wind. And 
seeing that terrific host of monkeys scattering in all directions, 
like clouds broken through (by winds), Kumbhakarna 
possessed of the splendour of clouds, from joy, emitted roars 
like clouds. Hearing those terrible shouts like unto the 
roaring of clouds in the welkin, innumerable monkeys dropped 
to the earth even as sala trees that have their roots severed. 
And issuing forth for destroying the foe, the high-souled 
Kumbhakarna, equipped with a tremendous bludgeon, struck 
extreme terror into the monkey-ranks, like unto the Lord 
armed with the Fatal rod at the Universal wreck. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




K AM AY ANA, 



>3t* 



SECTION LX V I * 



Having leapt over the wall, the exceedingly powerful 
and gigantic Kumbhakarna resembling a mountain-summit, 
speedily went out of the city. And then he sent up a mighty 
shout making the sea resound, and as if drowning the roar of 
the thunder and riving mountains. And seeing that fierce-eyed 
one, incapable of being vanquished by MaghavSLn or Varuna or 
Yama, the monkeys began to fly away. And seeing them 
scamper, the king’s son — Angada — said unto Nala and Nila 
and Gavaksha and the mighty Kumuda,— “Forgetting your 
lineage and prowess, whither do ye, exercised with fear, 
fly, — like inferior monkeys ? Ye amiable ones, desist. Why 
should ye save yourselves ? This Raksha doth not come to 
fight, — this is only a great phenomenon to affright. We 
shall by our vigor destroy this fearful phenomenon of the 
Rakshasas that hath presented itself. Therefore, let the 
monkeys desist. Cheered with much ado, the monkeys 
rallying, took up trees and advanced to the field of fight. 
And ceasing from flight, the wood-rangers waxing enraged, 
began to assail Kumbhakarna, like unto elephants in rut. 
And the exceedingly strong* Kumbhakarna, attacked with 
towering mountain-peaks and crags and trees with, flowering 
top, did not shake. And countless crags descending on his 
person, were shattered ; and trees with flowering tops, being 
broken, fell down to the earth. And incapable of containing 
himself (through rage), Kumbhakarna on his part fell to 
agitating the ranks of the powerful monkeys, even as a fire 
breaking out burneth down a forest. And many a prime 
monkey, crimsoned and drenched (with blood) lay down (on 
the ground) ; and many, resisted dropped to the earth, like 
trees bearing coppery flowers. And without looking before 

♦ Mahavaldh—plu — evidently a misprint for mahavalah — sing. — T . 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




r l ddha kAn da a/. 



13*3 



or after, the monkeys bounded and rushed. And on being 
attacked by the Rakshasa with ease some of those heroes 
dropped into the deep, and some entered the wilderness. 
And some ran by the same way by which they had crossed 
the ocean ; and some with pale faces darted into downs. 
And some of the bears ascended up trees, and some took 
shelter in mountains. And others dropped* down ; and some 
ran on. And some fell down to the earth, and some lay 
insensiblef as if dead. Seeing the monkeys break down, 
Angada addressed them, saying, — “Stay we shall fight. Desist, 
ye monkeys. Going round this Earth place find I none where 
ye may rest. Stop ye all. What is the need of preserving 
your lives. Ye poltroons, if ye fly away leaving your arms 
behind, your wives shall deride you ; and that is more painful 
to honorable persons than death itself. Born in long and 
noble lines, whither go ye, suffering from fear, like abject 
monkeys ? When renouncing your prowess, ye fly away in 
fear, forsooth ye are base. Where now is gone that talk of 
yours anent your nobility and the welfare (of your king) 
which you had held in society. He that liveth, despised (of 
all), hear the reproach of being a craven. Therefore do ye 
follow the way frequented by the worthy, and cast off fear. 
We will either lie down on the earth, being slain in conse- 
quence of our shortness of days, and thus attain the region 
of Brahma incapable of being attained by dastards ; or 
achieve renown by slaying the foe in fight and slain in battle, 
we shall enjoy the wealth of the region of heroes. Like an 
insect coming to a glowing and flaming fire, Kumbhakarna, 
seeing Kakutstha, shall not away hence living. If we save 
our lives by flight, and if the many are brought down by one, 
we shall lose our fame utterly.” As Angada decked in golden 
angadas was saying this, the monkeys, flying away spake 
unto that hero words not worthy of being spoken unto an 

/ * For fighting } remarks the commentator. 

f SupMh— sleeping ; but here, I presume, it means senseless, — T. 

165 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




RaM . 4 rANA,, 



13*4 

hero, — ‘ Great is the havoc that the Rakshasa — Kumbhakarna 
— hath spread amongst us. *Tis not the time to stay : life is 
dear unto us.” Having said this the monkey-bands darted 
to the ten cardinal points ; as they saw that dreadful and 
grim-eyed one approach. And as those flower of the forces 
were on the flight, those heroes were made to desist by 
Angada with words of comfort and hope pointing to the 
future. On being cheered by the intelligent son' of Vali, all 
the monkey-bands stood expecting his commands. — 



S ECT I ON lx Vll. 



having desisted on heraring the words of Angada, 
those huge-bodied ones, regaining calmness, became (again) 
intent on fight. And attaining energy at the exhortation (of 
Angada), and summoning up their prowess, they stayed in 
the field agreeably to the words of the powerful Angada. 
And inspired with spirits, the monkeys, determined to face 
their fate, rushed into the conflict, and, casting away all care 
for their lives, entered into a furious fight (with the foe). 
And speedily upraising trees and gigantic crags, the huge- 
bodied monkeys charged Kumbhakarna. Thereat the mighty 
Kumbhakarna possessed of a prodigious person waxing wroth, 
taking up his mace let the same alight on the enemies. 
And attacked by Kumbhakarna, seven, eight hundreds and 
thousands of monkeys measure their lengths on the earth. 
And casting about his arms, he rusheth on, devouring sixteen, 
eight, ten, twenty or thirty. And he devoured (the monkeys) 
like Garura swallowing up serpents. And then cheered up with 
much ado, the monkeys meeting together, and taking trees 
and rocks in their hands, stood their ground in the van of 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




yUDDRAKlNDAM . 



*3i5 



battle. Then uprooting a crag, Dwivida— foremost of 
monkeys— resembling an extended mass of clouds rushed 
against (Kumbhakarna) having the aspect of a mountain- 
summit. And uprooting it, the monkey hurled it at 
Kumbhakarna. And without descending on him, the crag fell 
down amidst the army, and smashed steeds and elephants and 
cans and choice chargers. And then taking another 
mountain top, Dwivida hurled it at other Rakshas. And 
smit with the impetus of the peak, Kumbhakarna had his 
chargers and his charioteers slain ; and the terrific field 
overflowed with the blood of Rakshas. And Rakshasa 
car-warriors by means of arrows resembling the Destroyer 
himself, cut off the heads of the foremost monkeys who had 
been setting up roars. And the high-souled monkeys also, 
uprooting giants trees, destroyed cars and horses and 
elephants and camels and Rakshasas. — And remaining in the 
sky, Hanuman discharged at Kumbhakarna’s head mountain- 
peaks and rocks and various trees. And all those mountain- 
tops he cut off with his dart ; and the mighty Kumbhakarna 
also baffled the shower of trees.— Then grasping his 
sharpened spear, Kumbhakarna darted against that terrific 
array of monkeys. And as he charged them, Hanuman 
armed with a mountain-peak, stood before him. And waxing 
enraged (Hanum&n) vehemently smote Kumbhakarna with 
a gigantic crag. And overpowered by that, Kumbhakarna 
experienced great torments, and his body was covered with fat 
and blood. And then as Guha had pierced Krauncha with his 
fierce dart, Kumbhakarna the mountain-like smote the Wind- 
god’s son in the chest with his dart resembling lightning or 
like a glowing mountain-summit. And having his mighty chest 
pierced in the mighty encounter, Hanuman, overwhelmed, and 
vomitting blood, — transported with wrath, set up roars re- 
sembling the roaring of the clouds at the universal disruption. 
And then, beholding him in torments, the Rakshas suddenly 
rejoiced, emitted shouts ; and the monkeys aggrieved and 



Digitized by 




rAajA yana. 



1316 

overcome with fright, began to fly Kumbhakarna in battle. 
And then the powerful Nila, arranging his forces, discharged 
a mountain-peak at the intelligent Kumbhakarna. And 
seeing it descend, he dealt it a blow ; and struck by the blow, 
the mountain-top was shattered in pieces ; and dropped to 
the earth glowing and shooting living flames. And then 
Rishabha and Sarabha and Nila and Gavaksha and 
Gandhamadana — these five terrific monkeys — rushed against 
Kumbhakarna. And in the encounter those mighty monkeys 
began to sorely assail the huge-bodied Kumbhakarna with 
crags and trees and slaps and kicks and blows. But those 
blows seemed to him like touches* and did not at all pain 
him. Then he fastened the vehement Rishabha with his 
arms. And agonised on being fastened with Kumbhakarna’s 
arms, that foremost of monkeys, the dreadful Rishabha, fell 
down to the earth, vomitting blood by his mouth. And then 
the enemy of Indra smit, Sarabha with blow, and Nila, 
in the conflict with his thigh, struck a slap at Gavaksha. 
And suffering great pain in consequence of the blows (dealt 
by Kumbhakarna those monkeys), deprived of their senses 
and bathed in blood, dropped down to the earth like 
Kin£ukas that have been cut down. And on those high- 
souled and mighty monkeys falling down, thousands of 
monkeys rushed at Kumbhakarna. And ascending a mountain- 
summit, those foremost of monkeys, + possessed of the 
splendour of a mountain-peak, sprang upon him and tore 
him with their teeth. And those foremost of monkeys 
attacked the long-armed Kumbhakarna with their claws and 
teeth and blows and arms. And then with thousands of 
monkeys on him that extraordinary one that fearful Rakshasa 
— resembling a hill, — looked like a mountain with trees on 
it. And like Garura eating up serpents, that wondrous 

* Like the feel , remarks Ramanuja, of wreaths, ungvents , etc . — T. 

+ Plavaganshavdk — foremost of the monkeys occurs twice — one is left out 
in the translation.- - T. 



Digitized by 




}' VDDHA K&NDA RK 



n*7 

strong one, wrought up with rage, devoured those ^monkeys, 
seizing them with his arms. And cast by Kumbhakarna into 
his mouth resembling the nether regions the monkeys 
emerged from his nose and ears. And eating up the monkeys, 
that foremost of R&kshasas resembling a hill, growing wroth, 
and fired with rage,* began to break the monkeys down. — 
And transported with passion, that Rakshasa, making the 
earth miry with flesh and blood, spread among the monkey- 
ranks like unto the fire at the time of the Universal dissolution. 
And in that encounter, Kumbhakarna armed with his dart 
in his hand, resembled the thunder-handed Sakra, or the 
noose-handed Destroyer himself. And as a conflagrationf 
burneth up a withered forest in the summer, Kumbhakarna 
burnt that host of the monkeys. And thus beaten (by 
Kumbhakarna), those monkeys, with their ranks destroyed, 
the monkeys, t racked with anxiety, began to cry in unnatural 
tones. And having innumerable monkeys slain by Kumbha- 
karna, the monkeys, aggrieved and their hearts riven with 
sorrow, sought the shelter of Raghava. Seeing the monkeys 
broken in the terrific encounter, the son of the thunder- 
handed^ darted impetuously against Kumbhakarna. And 
taking up a mighty crag, he momentarily setting up roars, 
and thereby terroizing all the Rakshasas — followers of 
Kumbhakarna, he discharged the mountain-peak right against 
Kumbhakarna* s crown. — And struck with that mountain- 
peak, Indra’s enemy — Kumbhakarna — rflamed up in fierce 
wrath. And. the loud-throated Kumbhakarna, terrifying all 
the monkeys vehemently darted against the enraged son 
of Vali ; and then that wondrous strong one hurled his dart 



* Sankrudha — infuriated, and Krndha, angered — this, pleonasm is in the 
text.— T. 

t The text has pdvaka — fire. — T. 

% Plavangamdh and vanardh — both mean monkeys. One is left out. — T. 

$ The thunder- handed is Indra — his son is VAli; and VAli's son is Angada, 
who is meant in the text. — T. 



Digitized by 





I3i8 



RAMkYkNA . 



at Angada. And as the dart descended, that foremost of 
monkeys endowed with strength,* and skilled in battle, 
evaded the weapon from his fleetness. And then swiftly 
springing up, he slapped (his antagonist) in the chest. And 
thereat that one resembling a hill, lost his senses. And 
recovering his senses, that exceedingly strong RStkshasa, 
dealt a blow at Angada ; and the latter dropped down 
senseless. And on that powerful monkey falling down 
insensible, Kumbhakarna, taking his dart, rushed against 
Sugriva. And seeing the exceeding stout Kumbhakarna 
approach, the heroic king of monkeys — Sugriva — sprang up ; 
and taking a mountain-top that one possessed of great 
strength darted against the mighty Kumbhakarna. And 

seeing that monkey, Kumbhakarna, stretching his limbs, stood 
before the lord of monkeys. And seeing Kumbhakarna, with 
his body laved in the blood of monkeys ; and eating up 
mighty monkeys, Sugriva addressed him, saying, — “Thou hast 
felled, heroes done deeds difficult of being performed, and hast 
devoured the warriors ; and thou hast thus attained renown. 
But let go now the monkey-army. What shalt thou do with the 
ignoble ? Do thou, O RSkshasa bear the descent of this 
mountain.” Hearing those words of the monkey-king instinct 
with strength and fortitude, that terrible RSkshasa— 

Kumbhakarna — said, — “O monkey, thou stormest, because 
thou art the grandson of Prajapatif and the son of the king 
of bears ; and because as such thou art endowed with fortitude 
and prowess.” Hearing Kumbhakarna’s speech, Sugriva 
whirling that mountain-peak, suddenly let it go ; and with 
that rock resembling Vajra or the thunder-bolt, smote 
Kumbhakarna in the chest. And on coming -in contact 
with his wide breast, that mountain-peak was at once 

shattered in shivers. And thereat the monkeys grew 

. * Valavdn — strong occurs twice. 

f Riksharajas — the father of Sugriva, was produced from the yawning of 
Praj&pati or BrahmA. — T. 



Digitized by 



YLDDHaKINDAM. 



l V9 

dispirited and the Rakshasa’s ranks shouted in joy. And 
struck with the mountain-summit, Kumbhakarna was fired 
with wrath ; and roared, expending his face. And then, 
whirling his dart resembling lightning displayed, he hurled it 
for compassing the destruction of the master of monkeys. 
Then swiftly bounding up, the Wind-god’s son, resisting that 
whetted dart fastened with golden chains, — with his hands 
violently snapped it in twain. And placing the same on his 
thighs, (Hanum&n) snapped that ponderous and terrible dart 
composed of black iron, and thereat the monkeys waxed 
delighted. And seeing the dart severed by Hanuman, the 
monkey-army, growing delighted, set up countless shouts and 
rushed in all directions. And the R&kshasa was seized with 
fear and turned away (from the field.) And the monkeys 
excessively delighted, set up loud shouts, and finding the dart 
broken, poured forth thanks to the Wind-god’s son. Then 
the mighty-minded lord of R&kshasas seeing the dart thus 
severed, (iprooted a peak from the Malaya and with it smote 
Sugriva. The king of monkeys struck with the mountain- 
peak fell senseless upon the field, and the demons finding 
him in this plight shouted out in great joy. Then 
Kumbhakarna coming to the wonderfully mighty master of 
monkeys, took him up and stole away from the field, as a 
violent gust of wind stealeth away a patch of cloud. Kumbha- 
karna, who resembled a mountain in loftiness of stature, 
while taking him away like a mass of cloud appeared like 
Sumeru overtopped with lofty peaks. Thus the lord of 
R&kshasas went on hearing thanks (from the Rakshasas) and 
shouts from the lords of the heavens, wondered at the capture 
of the foremost of monkeys. Thus taking him captive, that 
mighty one resembling Indra in puissance, thought his death 
would destroy the entire host of the opponents together with 
R&ghava. Then Hanuman, the shrewd son of Maruta, finding 
the whole host of monkeys scattered in all directions, as well 
as Sugriva captured by Kumbhakarna bethought himself— 



Digitized by 




1320 



R&mA V A N A. 



“What ought to be done by me now that our king has been 
captured ? I will doubtless do as befits me now — let me assume 
the shape of a mountain and kill the Rakshasas. Let me kill 
the mighty Kumbhakarna, splitting his body with my strong 
fist and thus relieve the master of monkeys — thus let the 
whole host of monkeys become delighted. Or, even when 
captured by the whole host of gods or Asuras or serpents 
he is mighty enough to extricate himself. Meseems, the 
lord of monkeys struck with dart in battle by Kumbhakarna 
has not yet recovered his * senses. Else in a moment he 
would do the needful for himself as well as the monkeys. 
Should the relief of the mighty-minded Sugriva come from 
me, I should be incurring his displeasure and it would 
certainly lead to the loss of his reputation for ever ; then I 
must wait a moment and see his own might displayed by 
himself when relieved. Meanwhile let me cheer up the 
monkey-host.” Thinking thus within himself, Hanuman, that 
son of Maruta, began to stay the mighty host of monkeys. 
In the meantime Kumbhakarna entered Lanka with Sugriva 
trembling, being honored with the showering of beautiful 
flowers from the sky, the buildings on the main roads and the 
town-gate. Then the mighty one (Sugriva) slowly recovered 
his senses with the shower of fried paddy and sweet scent 
and the sprinkling of water as well as with the coolness of 
the streets. Then that mighty-minded (Sugriva), caught in 
the arms of the powerful Rakshasa, having with difficulty 
come to his senses and surveying around him the streets of 
the town bethought himself: — ‘‘When thus within the grasp 
of the enemy how can I take revenge ? Or let me do what 
will be acceptable and advantageous to our army.” Then 
advancing all on a sudden, he with his nails and sharp teeth 
cut off the ears and nose of that lord of the enemies of the 
gods and split both his sides with the blow of his feet. And 
Kumbhakarna losing his ears and nose and having his sides 
split with nails and teeth grew angry, and becoming all 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YlDDHAKlNDAM . 



1321 



covered over with blood, threw Sugriva to the ground and 
pressed him. Thus pressed upon the ground with main 
force and severely struck by the enemies of gods, he flew to 
the skies like a ball-rolling, and once more joined Rama. 
The mighty Kumbhakarna having lost his nose and ears 
and drenched in blood, appeared like a mountain covered all 
over with streamlets. That huge-bodied Rakshasa, younger 
brother of R&vana, terrible in appearance, resembling a mass 
of deep black collyrium, and covered all over with blood, 
appeared like an evening cloud ; and (once more) made 
up his mind to appear in battle. Sugriva having thus 
escaped, that dreadful enemy of the king of the celestials 
in wrath again rushed to battle ; and finding himself 
destitute of arms took up a fearful mace. And then that 
mighty-minded one, the Raksha Kumbhakarna, issuing out 
of the city began to devour the terrific host of monkeys, as 
doth the mighty fire eat up people at the end of a Yuga. 
On entering the mighty host of monkeys, the hungry Kumbha- 
karna, hankering after flesh and blood, ate up the monkeys, and 
with them, devoured many a Rakshasa and Pisacha by, mistake. 
Thus, as Death devoureth creatures at the end of a Yuga, he 
destroyed the mighty monkeys. And he in wrath, taking up with 
one hand the monkeys along with the Rakshasas, hurriedly 
threw them into his mouth, — one, two three, or many at a time. 
And blood and fat flowed copiously down his body; and though 
struck by the monkeys with peaks of mountains, the mighty 
one devoured all those monkeys. And the monkeys as they were 
being devoured, saught the shelter of Rama. And Kumbha- 
karna wrought up with wrath, chased amain hundreds of 
monkeys, eating up seven, eight, twenty, or thirty. And 
fastening (the monkeys) with his arms, he, devouring them, 
rushed on. And resembling the Destroyer of prodigious 
dimensions at the end of a Yuga, that one furnished with 
extremely sharp teeth, having his body covered with fat, 
marrow and blood, and coiling entrails about his ears, began 
166 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1322 



R nM A r AN A. 



to discharge darts. And at this moment, that subduer of 
hostile hosts and captor of the capitals of foes — Sumitra’s 
son — Lakshmana. growing enraged, entered on an encounter 
with the enemy. And Lakshmana endued with prowess 
shot seven shafts at Kumbhakarna’s body ; and next, taking 
up other arrows also discharged them (at his antagonist). 
And thereat that Rakshasa, smarting under the wounds 
inflicted by that weapon,* cut it off (by means of a weapon). 
Thereupon grew enraged the powerful Lakshmana — enhancer 
of Sumitr&’s joy. And then as the wind overspreadeth 
evening clouds, he with his shafts covered hist shining and 
graceful mail entirely made of gold. And smit with arrows 
dight with gold, that one resembling a mass of dark-blue 
collyrium appeared beautiful like the ray-furnished Sun 
surrounded by clouds. Then that dreadful .R&kshasa voiced 
like masses of clouds, scornfully addressed the enhancer of 
Sumitra’s felicity, saying, — ‘By dauntlessly fighting with me, 
who have without ado brought down the Destroyer himself in 
battle, thou hast established thy heroism. Even by staying 
before me, who am equipped with arms in this encounter, and 
who in mighty conflict resemble Death himself, thou 
deservest to be honored. What shall I say of thy fighting ? 
Not even that lord — Sakra himself — mounted on his Air&vata, 
and engirt by all the immortals, — had ever before stayed 
before me in the field. But to-day, O Sumitra’s son, albeit a 
boy, thou hast gratified me with thy prowess. Now taking 
thy leave, I wish to go to Raghava. And as I have been 
well pleased in battle with thy vigour and strength and 
enthusiasm, I now wish to slay Rama alone, who being slain, 
all are slain. On Rama being here slain by me, the rest 
remaining in the encounter — them shall I undertake with my 
all-crushing vigour/’ When that Raksha had spoken thus, 

* But Lakshmana had not discharged a single weapon only against Kumbha- 
karna. — T. 

f Kumbhakarna’s. 



Digitized by 





y 0 DDHA KANDA M . 



* 3*3 



(Lakshmana). Sumitr&'s son, present in that contest, answered 
him laughing in terrible words,saying, — “That thy prowess is 
incapable of being borne by Sakra and other celestials, — is 
true. It is not otherwise, O hero. To-day I myself have wit- 
nessed thy prowess. Yonder is Da9aratha’s son — Rama — stay- 
ing like a moveless mountain.” Hearing this, that night-ranger 
— Kumbhakarna — possessed of immense might, disregard- 
ing Lakshmana and passing beyond Sumitra’s son, rushed 
against Rama, making the earth tremble. Thereat Da^aratha's 
son, Rama, employing a terrific weapon, discharged sharp- 
ened shafts at Kumbhakarna' s breast. Thereat flames mixed 
with live embers shot out from the mouth of that enraged 
one suddenly rushing (against Rama), — as Rama pierced him 
(with his arrows). And on being frightfully pierced by Rama's 
weapons, that foremost of Rakshasas, roaring wrathfully darted 
against Rama, and pursued the monkeys in the conflict. And 
those shafts adorned with peacock's plumes, alighting on 
( Kumbhakarna's ) chest, his mace, escaping his hand, 
dropped to the earth ; and all his (other) arms also were scat- 
tered on the ground. And when that exceedingly powerful 
one saw himself deprived of all his arms, he began to spread 
a huge havoc by means of his clenched fists and hands. 
And with his body entirely covered with arrows and bathed 
in blood, he began to bleed like a hill overflowing witli 
fountains. And fired with wrath and maddened with blood,* 
he rusheth on, devouring monkeys and Rakshasas and bears. 
And that redoubtable one possessed of dreadful prowess, 
resembling the Reaper himself, whirling a mighty mountain- 
peak, hurled it aiming at Rama. Thereat Bharata's elder 
brother, the righteous Rama, ere that prodigious peak had 
alighted, severed the same by means of seven straight- 
speeding shafts wrought with gold. Intent on finishing 
Kumbhakarna, the virtuous Lakshmana, revolving many a 
means, (at last) spoke unto Rima, — “O king, this one 
* Perhaps with the smell of blood. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 





* 3 2 4 



RlMlYANA . 



knoweth not monkeys and Rakshasas, — maddened with the 
smell of blood, he eateth up his own as well as his enemies. 
Now let the foremost monkeys, putting forth their best, 
mount on him ; and let the leaders of bands according to 
their rank, stand surrounding him. And then to-day this 
wicked-minded Rakshasa, oppressed with a mighty weight, 
will no longer be able to eat up any more monkeys.” Hearing 
the words of the intelligent prince, those exceedingly 
powerful monkeys with alacrity ascended Kumbhakarna. 
And Kumbhakarna mounted by those monkeys, waxing 
exceedingly enraged, shook them vehemently, even as mad 
elephants shake the drivers thereof. And Raghava seeing 
them shaken, and concluding the Rakshasa to be wroth, 
furiously sprang forward, taking his bow. And with his eyes 
crimsoned with choler, the gentle Raghava, as if burning up 
the Rakshasa with his eyes, rushed forth vehemently, sum- 
moning up all his impetuosity, thereby cheering up the leaders 
of bands that had been sore tried by the might of Kumbha- 
karna. And equipped with an excellent quiver and arrows, 
Rama cheering up the monkeys sprang forward, taking a 
bow, resembling a serpent ; terrific; having a stout string; 
and embellished in gold. Then surrounded by exceedingly 
invincible monkey-bands, that highly powerful hero, followed 
by Lakshmana, marched forth. And he saw the redoubtable 
and high-souled Kumbhakarna, with his body drenched in 
blood, and with blood-shot eyes ; rushing against all, like unto 
an infuriated elephant of the cardinal point's ; pursuing the 
monkeys; wrought up with wrath; environed by Rakshasas; 
appearing like the Vindhya or the Mandara ; decked with 
golden angadas ; bleeding from his mouth ; like clouds 
pouring showers ; licking at the corners of his mouth laved 
with blood ; smashing the monkey-ranks; and resembling 
Yama the Destroyer. And that best of persons, seeing that 
foremost of Rakshasas having the splendour of a living fire, 
stretched his bow to its full bent. And fired with wrath at 



Digitized by W-ooQle 




rUDDHAKlNDAM. 



1325 

the twang of his bow, that foremost of R&kshasas, inflamed 
with wrath, — not brooking that report, rushed against 
Raghava. Thereat, the gentle R&ma, endowed with arms 
resembling the body of the sovereign of serpents, in that 
encounter addressed Kumbhakarna, like unto an elevated 
cloud and possessed of the splendour of a mountain, — as he 
darted forward, saying, — “Come, O king of Rakshas ! Let 
no grief be thine ! Here I stay, taking my bow in my hand. 
Know me for the destroyer of the race of the R§,kshasas— 
thou who in a moment shalt be deprived of thy senses. ,, 
Rowing that this was Rama, (Kumbhakarna) laughed in 
frightful accents ; and then, wrought up with wrath, rushed 
against the monkeys in the encounter. And as if riving the 
breasts of all the monkeys (present), the exceedingly energetic 
Kumbhakarna, laughing frightfully and in a terrific manner, 
— resembling the rumbling of clouds, addressed Raghava, 
saying, — “Take me not for Vir&dha, or for Kavandha, or yet 
for Khara. I am not VSLli or Maricha. I am Kumbhakarna, 
that am come. Behold my dreadful and mighty mace entirely 
made of iron. By help of this I had formerly brought down 
deities and D&navas. It doth not behove thee to scorn me 
in that my nose hath been severed. I do not feel any the 
smallest torment in consequence of my ears and nose having 
been cut off. O tiger of the Ikshwaku line, O sinless one, 
do thou witness the prowess that is in my frame. And 
thereafter, when thou shalt have displayed thy prowess and 
power, shall I devour thee up.”' Hearing Kumbhakarna’s 
words, Rama discharged (at him) shafts furnished with knobs. 
And smit with these having the impetus of the thunder- 
bolt, the foe of the celestials did not feel any pain or smart. 
And those shafts which had severed the seven stately sdlas, 
and, to boot, had slain Vali — best of monkeys, — they resembl- 
ing the thunder itself — could not impart any pain to 
Kumbhakarna* s body. And drinking up in his body those 
arrows resembling a shower, the enemy of the great Indra 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1326 



RaMAFANa, 



whirling his mace possessed of fierce vehemence, put out the 
arrowy discharge of R§ma. Then that Raksha whirling his 
mace washed in blood, capable of striking terror into the 
mighty hosts of gods and Danavas, and possessed of fierce 
impetus, — made the monkey-army take to its heels. Then 
Rama, taking a mighty V f ayavya weapon, used the same against 
the night-ranger; and cut off his arm with the mace. And 
having his arm cut off, he set up tremendous roars. And 
his arm with the mace, resembling a mountain-peak, cut off 
by R&ghava's arrows, fell in the midst of the army of the 
monkey-king, and destroyed that army,* Thereat the 
monkeys remaining after those broken and slain, — dispirited, 
and having their limbs wounded, — moving aside, looked on 
the dreadful encounter between the Raksha and the lord of 
men. And then Kumbhakarna, having his arm severed, 
resembling the foremost of mountains with its crest hewn 
away by a mighty sabre i tore up a tree with his (remaining) 
arm and in the conflict rushed against the monarch of men. 
Thereupon with a shaft plated in gold, set upon a weapon of 
Indra, Rama cut off his uplifted arm with a palm tree, look- 
ing like the body of a pannaga . And that arm of Kumbhakarna, 
being severed, dropped inert on the earth, like a hill, and 
crushed trees and rocks and crags and monkeys and Rakshasas. 
And Rama, seeing that one shorn of his arms suddenly spring 
up, roaring, — took up two whetted crescents, and in the 
contest cut off the legs of the R&kshasa. And thereupon 
those legs (of his), making all sides and quarters and rocks 
and caves and the mighty main and Lanka herself.and the 
army of the monkeys and the Rakshasas, — resound, — dropped 
down (on the ground). And having his arms cut off and his 
legs also severed, (Kumbhakarna), opening wide his mouth 
resembling in sheen the mouth of a mare, roaring swiftly 
darted against Raghava, — even as Rahu pursueth the Moon 
in the firmament. Then Rama stuffed his mouth full of 

* This, 6f course, is not to be taken literally. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





) uddhakAndam. 



1327 



sharpened shafts having their feathered parts furnished with 
gold. And having his mouth filled; he could not articulate ; 
but with extreme effort uttered indistinct accents and 
swooned away* Then R<ima took an arrow of Indra,— 
whetted and knobbed, impetuous as the wind, resembling the 
effulgence of the Sun, and like unto the very banner of 
Brahma, or the Destroyer himself ; and fatal to foes. And then 
R&ma hurled it at the ranger of the night. And thereat that 
weapon hurled by R&ma’s arm, resembling a smokeless flame, 
lighting up the ten cardinal points with its own glory, — saught 
him that was possessed of the dreadful energy of Sakra’s 
thunder-bolt. And therewith he (R£ma) cutoff the head of the 
lord of Rakshas resembling a mountain-summit, furnished 
with prominent teeth, — from which the ear-rings had fallen off, 
— even as formerly Purandara had cut off the head of Vritra. 
And then Kumbhakarna’s huge head deprived of the ear-rings 
appeared like the Moon seated in the midst (of the heavens) 
on the rising of the Sun in the morning.t And struck with 
Rama’s arrow, the head of the Raksha resembling a hill fell 
down to the earth ; and (in its fall) crushed edifices on the 
highways and gateways $ and elevated walls also it bore down 
to the ground. And then that Raksha of gigantic proportions 
and vast to the view plunged into the deep ; and crushing 
huge and mighty fishes and serpents, saught the depths. 
And on that enemy of the Brahmanas and gods, endowed 
with immense strength, — having been slain in battle, the 
earth shook and the mountains also ; and from excess of joy 
the celestials shouted aloud. And those deities and saints and 
Maharshis and Pannagas,and celestials and (other) ,beings and 
birds and Guhyakas, together with Yakshas and Gandharbas, 
* — all these who had stationed themselves in the welkin, — were 
rejoiced at the prowess of Rama. And at his (Kumbhakarna's) 
great destruction, the intelligent adherents of the king 
of Nairitas, — aggrieved exceedingly, began to cry at the sight 

t This sloka is wanting in many texts. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





1328 



RAmA rAiVA. 



of that best of the Raghus, even as mad elephants cry at 
sight of a lion. And like unto the Sun emerged from the 
mouth of Rahu, and destroying the darkness of the celestial 
fields, — shone Rama in the midst of the monkey-army having 
slain Kumbhakarna in battle. And countless monkeys 
experienced the very height of delight ; and on (their) foe of 
terrific strength having been slain, they with countenances 
resembling awaked lotuses paid homage unto the king’s 
son — Raghava — the sharer of good fortune. And as the 
monarch of the immortals had rejoiced on slaying the mighty 
Asura — Vritra — Bharata’s elder brother rejoiced on having 
in battle slain that smiter of celestial hosts, Kumbhakarna in 
mighty conflict, never (before) vanquished in renowned 
encounters. 



SECTION LX VIII* 



Seeing Kumbhakarna slain by the high-souled Raghava, 
the Rakshasas conveyed the tidings to the lord of the 
Rakshasas — Ravana ; (and addressed him, saying), — “O king, 
that one resembling the Destroyer himself, urged on by 
Death,* — having scoured the monkey-army and eaten up 
monkeys, — and for a while displayed his prowess, hath met 
with his quietus at the hands of Rama exerting his energy. 
And with half his body immersed in the dreadful deep, thy 
brother, Kumbhakarna, with his nose and ears cut off, and 
blood besmearing his body, — with his head and limbs hewn 
away, and his body uncovered, — mountain-like blocketh 
up the gate of Lanka with his person, — and resembleth a tree 
that hath been consumed by a forest-fire.” Hearing the 
mighty Kumbhakarna slain in battle, RSvana burning in 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




VUDDHA KANDAM. 



* 3 2 9 



grief, swooned away and dropped to the earth. And hearing 
their uncle slain, Tri^iras* and Atikaya — destroyers of gods 
and men, — began to weep, oppressed with sorrow. And 
Mahodaraf and Mahapar9waJ hearing of their uncle slain by 
Rama of untiring deeds, were overcome with grief. Then 
regaining his senses with extreme exertion, that foremost of 
Rikshasas, distressed in consequence of the destruction of 
Kumbhakarna, mourned with his senses overwhelmed, 
saying, — “O hero ! O humbler of the pride of the foe ! O 
mighty Kumbhakarna ! Leaving me, thou through Destiny, 
hast gone to the abode of Yama. O exceedingly powerful one, 
leaving me (lone) whither dost thou wend, without extracting 
my dart as well as* that of thy friends ? Now really I am not, 
inasmuch as my right arm hath dropped. Backed by this 
one, I would not fear celestials and Asuras. How to-day 
forsooth hath such a hero — crusher of the hauteur of gods 
and D§navas — resembling the Fire arisen at the hour of 
universal wreck, — been slain in fight by Raghava ? He who 
could not be harmed by the concussion of the thunder- 
bolt itself — how can he, smitten with Rama's arrows, sleep 
soundly on the earth ? These gods stationed in the sky 
along with the saints, — beholding thee slain in battle, are 
shouting in glee. Surely to-day the monkeys overjoyed, — 
finding occasion, will scale all the gateways and fortifications 
of LankSL. I have nothing to do with empire. And what 
shall 1 do with Sita ? And deprived of Kumbhakarna, I do 
not even wish to live. If I do not slay in encounter that slayer 
of my brother — R&ghava, — certainly death is even that which 
is good for me, — otherwise, this life is useless. This very 
day will I repair to that place where my younger brother is. 
Forsaking my brother, I forsooth dare not live for a moment ; 
for the gods shall laugh on seeing me, who had formerly 

♦ Three-headed. — T. 

f Huge-bellied. — T. 

X Mighty-flanked. — T. 

167 



Digitized by 





I 33° 



rAmAvaNa . 



wronged them. But, how, O Kumbhakarna, thou having 
been slain, shall I conquer Indra ? Now the beneficial words 
of Bibhishana have been verified. And as through blindness 
I did not accept the advice of that high-souled one, Kumbha- 
karna and of Prahasta, this disaster arisen, shameth me sore. 
And as I had disgraced the virtuous and graceful Bibhishana, 
this peril producing grief, hath been the consequence of my 
conduct.^ Having thus piteously and long lamented 
Kumbhakarna, the Ten-necked one, with his inmost soul 
overwhelmed with sorrow, and sore distressed in consequence 
of grief, — fell down, knowing his brother — the enemy of 
Indra — slain in battle. 



SECTION lx i x. 



Hearing the lamentations of the wicked-minded RSvana, 
overwhelmed with grief, Tri^ras addressed him, saying, — 
“O Sire, this second uncle unto us possessed of mighty 
prowess hath* forsooth been slain in fight. But, O king, 
heroes never indulge in grief as thou doest. O lord, thou 
certainly alone art competent to conquer the triple world. 
Wherefore then dost thou vent such sorrow like an ignoble 
one ? Thou hast thy dart conferred on thee by BrahmS. ; 
and thy mail and thy weapon — the bow — and thy car yoked 
with a thousand asses, sending forth clatter resembling the 
rumbling of clouds. The deities and the Danavas have by 
means of thy arms been terrified over and over again. And 
furnished with all arms, thou ought to chastise RSghava. 
But stay at thy pleasure, O mighty sovereign, I will go out 

* Evameva— forsooth) as I render it. The commentator, however, says it 
means such as thou hast described him. — T. 



Digitized by 




TVDDHAKlNDAM . 



* 33 * 



to battle ; and even as Garura captureth serpents, will l 
capture thine enemies. And as Samvara was vanquished by 
the lord of the immortals, or Naraka by Vishnu, will I bring- 
ing down Rama in battle make him sleep (in the field). ,, 
Hearing Tri^iras* words, Ravana — lord of Rakshasas — urged 
on by Fate, considered himself as having regained his life. 
And hearing the speech of Tri^iras, Devantaka, and 
Narantaka, and the energetic Atikaya also, were wrought up 
with martial enthusiasm. And then those foremost of 
Nairitas — the heroic sons of Ravana — endowed with the 
prowess of Sakra himself — roared out, ‘I will go/ ‘I will go/ 
And all could range the sky, and all were skilled in illusion, 
and all were crushers of the pride of the immortals ; and all 
were irrisistible in encounter. And all of them were endowed 
with superior strength, and all had achieved wide celebrity. 
They had never been heard of as having been beaten in fight 
even by the gods along with the Gandharvas, or the mighty 
serpents accompanied by the Kinnaras. And all were skilled 
in weapons and heroic ; and all were versed in warfare. And 
all were possessed of the higher knowledge ; and all had ob- 
tained boons. And then the king surrounded by those sons of 
his, appearing like celestials, — capable of injuring the force and 
fortune of the foe, — looked splendid like MaghavUn environed 
by the immortals, humblers of the hauteur of mighty Danavas. 
And embracing his sons and adorning them in ornaments,— 
he sent them to the field with his best benedictions. And 
RSLvana sent the brothers — Yudhyonmatta and Matta — for 
protecting the princes in the field. And then, saluting the 
high-souled Ravana — destroyer of creatures, — and going 
round him, those huge-bodied ones marched forth. And 
furnished with every description of medicinal herbs and 
perfumes, these six Nairitas — foremost of their kind — 
endowed with great strength,— burning for battle, march- 
ed forth, — Tr^iras and Atikaya, and Devantaka and 
Narantaka, and Mahodara and Mah^parfwa went out, 



Digitized by nOOQle 




1332 



RAMKYaNa . 



urged on by Fate. Then Mahodara mounted the elephant— 
Sudar^ana — sprung in the race of Air&vata, and resembling 
dark-blue clouds. And accoutred in every weapon, and 
decked with quivers, he looked splendid on his elephant like 
the Sun ascending the crest of the Setting-hill. And 
RSvana’s son — Tri^iras — ascended a car yoked with excellent 
steeds, and furnished w T ith every variety of arms. And 
having ascended the car, Tri^iras bow in hand appeared 
beautiful like a mass of burning clouds having lightning and 
meteors, and crowned with Indra’s bow.* And dight with 
three diadems, Tri^iras looked splendid in that superb car, 
like the monarch of mountains Himavan — with the three 
golden hills. And then that foremost of all bowmen — the 
powerful Atikaya — son unto the lord of RSkshasas — ascended 
the best of cars, having excellent wheels and akshas , and 
yoked with excellent steeds, — and furnished with bottoms 
and holes ; flaming with quivers and bows j and bristling 
with prdgas and swords and blugdeons. And adorned with 
a crown plated with wrought gold and (other) ornaments, 
he looked like the Meru swimming in its own splendour. 
And that powerful son of the king surrounded by the Nairitas 
looked lovely on that car like the thunder-handed (Deity) 
engirt by the immortals. And Narantaka mounted a white 
steed resembling Uchchai^rava, caparisoned in gold, having 
a large frame and endowed with the velocity of the Wind. 
And taking a praga> Narantaka appeared like the energetic 
Guha mounted on the peacock, grasping his dart. And 
taking a bludgeon decked in golden ornaments, DevSLntaka 
resembled Vishnu at the time of the churning of the ocean, 
holding the DarbhyS,t and staying burthening (the earth). 
And the powerful Mahap&r^wa endowed with terrific energy, 
taking his mace, appeared like Kuvera holding in his hand a 

* The rain-bow is called sometimes Indra's bow and at others Rdma's 
bow. — T. 

f The mountain Mandara which served as the churning-stick. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





yuddharAndam. 



1333 



mace in the encounter. And like immortals issuing out of 
Amar&vati, they marched out with elephants and steeds and 
cars sending out clatter resembling the rumbling of clouds. 
And them followed high-souled RSkshasas equipped with 
mighty-arms. And those sun-bright high-souled princes 
decked with diadems appeared splendid like burning planets 
in the firmament. And the various gorgeous attires which 
they had worn resembled rows of cranes in the sky, looking 
like autumnal clouds. Resolved on dying or conquering the 
foe in fight, those heroes sallied out seeking encounter. And 
those high-souled ones, incapable of being repressed in fight, 
roared and shouted and discharged shafts and held them. 
And the earth shook as they sent up leonine roars and struck 
at their arms with their hands ; and the sky seemed riven 
with the leonine roars of the Rakshas. And issuing out 
cheerfully, those foremost of Rakshasas endowed with great 
strength beheld that monkey-army staying with upraised 
rocks and stones. And the high souled monkeys also 
saw that mighty host of Rakshasas thronging with elephants, 
horses and cars, and ringing with hundreds of bell-lets ; 
resembling dark-blue clouds ; upraising mighty arms ; and 
environed on all sides by Nairitas resembling flaming fire. 
And seeing that force advance, the monkeys, finding 
opportunity, upraising giant crags, momentarily set up shouts. 
And thereat, the Rakshasas, incapable of bearing those 
shouts, shouted in reply unto the monkeys. And again the 
monkeys shouted unto the Rakshas, who were unable to put 
up with that cry. And hearing that loud shout of the 
monkey-leaders, the mighty Rakshas incapable of bearing 
that noise expressive of exhilaration, — shouted still more 
dreadfully. And then diving into that dreadful R&kshasa 
army, the monkey-leaders began to range it with uplifted 
rocks, — like unto mountains. And equipped with trees aud 
stones, the monkeys enraged, ranged the Raksha army, now 
rising into the sky, and now coming dow T n to the earth. And 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1 334 



rAMAyaNa. 



some among the powerful monkeys went about taking 
broad-shouldered trees. And the encounter that took place 
between the thronging Rakshas and monkeys was some- 
thing terrific. And (the monkeys) began to pour a wonderful 
shower of trees and rocks and cliffs. And the monkeys 
of dread prowess were resisted with vollies of shafts. 
And in the contest the monkeys and Rakshasas emitted 
leonine roars. And monkeys crushed YatudhSnas with rocks, 
and, wrought with rage, (they) in the encounter slew 
(Rakshasas) covered with armour and ornaments ; and some 
slew heroes mounted on cars and elephants and steeds. 
And the monkeys on a sudden slew heroic Yatudhanas. And 
smit with mountain-peaks on their persons, and with their 
eyes falling off, the foremost of Rakshasas moved, dropped 
down, or roared in the scene of conflict. And the Rakshasas 
(on their part) pierced the foremost of monkeys with 
sharpened and keen darts and clubs and scimitars ; and slew 
them with darts and pracas. And, eager for bringing down 
each other, the monkeys and the Rakshasas with their 
persons washed with the blood of their antagonists felled 
each other. And in a moment the earth was covered with 
crags and swords discharged by monkeys and Rakshasas, 
— and was drenched in gore. And the field was blocked 
up with scattered mountain-like Rakshas influenced by 
martial ardour, — mangled by their enemies. And the 
monkeys thrown down and felled by means of broken crags 
and monkeys* and arms and legs, — waged a wonderful war. 
And those foremost of Nairitas slew monkeys with (the dead 
bodies of monkeys) ; and the monkeys smote Rakshasas 
with (the dead bodies of) Rakshasas ; and the Rakshasas 
slew (the monkeys), hurling rocks and crags. And snatching 
away their own arms by main force, the monkeys finished 
Rakshas ; and they slaughtered them with mountain-peaks, 
and also wounded each other. And the monkeys and 

* i.e. the carcasses thereof. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




lUDDHAKlNDAM . 



1335 



Rakshasas emitted leonine roars in the encounter. And the 
Rakshasas, slain by the monkeys, having their mail and 
defence for the body rent, bled like unto trees exuding 
sap. And in that encounter, some among the monkeys 
destroyed cars with cars, elephants with elephants, and steeds 
with steeds. And the Rakshasas rived the trees and rocks 
of the foremost monkeys by means of Kshurapras and 
crescents and sharpened Bhallas and arrows. And in 
that encounter, the earth became impassable, having been 
scattered with crags baffled and severed trees and (warriors) 
slain by monkeys and Rakshas. And those monkeys, equipped 
with various weapons, and with their vigor unworn, entering 
upon the conflict casting off fear, — cheerfully putting forth 
efforts springing from pride of spirit, warred on with the 
Rakshasas. And in that fearful conflict, which was being 
waged, on the monkeys having been exhilarated and the 
Rakshasas having been brought down, the Maharshis and the 
deities sent up shouts. Then mounted on a charger endued 
with the celerity of the Wind, and grasping a whetted dart, 
Nar&ntaka entered into that fierce army of monkeys, like a 
fish diving into the deep. And that hero by means of an 
effulgent bearded dart pierced seven hundred monkeys ; and 
at one time the high-souled enemy of lndra slew the army of 
the foremost of monkeys. And the VidySdharas and 
Maharshis saw that high-souled one mounted on horseback, 
ranging the monkey-ranks. And his course was discovered, 
miry with flesh and blood and blocked up with mountain-like 
monkeys fallen. And when the monkeys set their hearts on 
displaying their prowess, NarSntaka, baffling them, pierced 
them with shafts. And he consumed the monkey-army, like fire 
burning a forest. And when the wood-rangers uprooted trees 
and crags, they slain by bearded darts dropped down like 
mountains riven by the thunder. And raising a glowing pr&qa s 
the powerful Narantaka began to range about in the rear* 

• Sangrdmdnte, I presume, means rear of the forces ; although literally it 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





133 * 



rAmA I'a/vj. 



of the forces} dashing everywhere (against the foe) in 
fight, like the wind in the rainy season. And the heroes could 
not appear prominently, or keep their posts. And how 
could they then move freely ? And that one endued with 
prowess pierced everyone, whether springing, or staying, 
or moving. And broken through by a single prdga, resembl- 
ing the Reaper, and furnished with solar effulgence, the 
monkey-ranks began to roll on the earth. And the monkeys 
were ill fitted to bear the impetus of that praga having the 
touch of thunder itself j and they raised a loud cry. And 
the appearances of those monkey-heroes falling were like 
mountains toppling, having their summits riven with the 
thunder-bolt. Those high-souled and powerful monkeys that 
formerly had been brought down by Kumbhakarna, — having 
recovered, were present with Sugriva in this encounter. 
And Sugriva, looking around, saw that monkey-army flying 
in ail directions, agitated with the fear of Narantaka. And 
after seeing the army in flight, he saw NarSntaka himself, 
advancing, wielding a praga , and mounted on a steed. And 
as soon as he saw (that hero), the exceedingly energetic 
lord of monkeys — Sugriva — addressed the heroic prince 
Angada, endowed with strength equal to that of Indra, 
saying, — “Go against this heroic Rakshasas that is mounted 
on a steed ; and speedily deprive of life that one who is 
devouring up the ranks of his foes.” Hearing his master’s 
speech, Angada descended from that host resembling clouds, 
like the powerful Sun himself. And resembling a mass of 
crags, Angada — foremost of monkeys — adorned with Angadas % 
appeared beautiful like a mountain with metals on it. And 
weaponless himself, and furnished only with nails and teeth, 
Vali’s son attacking Narantaka, said, — “Stay ! What shalt 
thou do with these inferior monkeys? This prdga> having 
the feel of the thunder-bolt, do thou hurl at my heart itself.” 

means, at the conclusion of the conflict , — because this interpretation would not 
be proper, the battle being now at its hottest. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





}’ UDDHA KANDA M . 



*337 



Hearing Angada's words, NarSntaka was fired with wrath. 
And knawing his upper lip with his teeth and sighing like 
a serpent, Narantaka, wrought with wrath, approached Viili's 
son. And then whirling his pr&$a> he suddenly discharged 
that flaming (weapon) against Angada. And then it was 
snapped on the breast of Vali’s son, resembling the thunder- 
bolt, and dropped to the earth. And seeing the prafa 
broken in pieces, like a powerful snake severed by Suparna, 
V&li's son, raising his hand, dealt a slap at the head of his 
(Nar&ntaka’s) steed. Thereat, with his legs sinking down 
and his eye-balls coming off and his tongue hanging down, 
and wearing the look of a mountain, — on being smit with that 
slap, Nar&ntaka’s steed fell down to the ground, with its 
head lying at random. And Narantaka seeing his charger 
slain and fallen, was seized with a furious wrath, and raising 
his clenched fist, that one endowed with exceeding great 
energy in that conflict hit Vali's son on the head. Thereat 
Angada having his head wounded by that blow, warm blood 
gushed out plentifully. And momentarily burning and 
momentarily swooning, he, regaining his senses, was amazed. 
Then Vali’s son, the high-souled Angada clenching his fist 
into a blow resembling Death itself in energy, and like unto 
a mountain-peak, let it descend on the chest of Narantaka. 
Thereat, with his breast riven and broken down, vomitting 
flames and having his body bathed in blood, Narantaka 
dropped down to the earth, like a hill shattered by the 
impetus of the thunder-bolt. And on Narantaka of exceeding 
prowess having been slain by Vali's son in battle, there 
arose a tremendous uproar in the firmament from the wood- 
rangers and the foremost of celestials. And Angada having 
performed that difficult deed of prowess, capable of delighting 
the mind of Rama, was seized with amazement ;* and that 
one of terrific feats in fight was again inspired with delight 
in the encounter. 

* Probably, at his own prowess, — T. 

168 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




RAmAFaNA. 



* 33 ® 

And seeing Nar&ntaka slain, the foremost of Nairitas 
-—including the thre-headed Dev&ntaka and Pulastya's 
descendant, Mahodara, — began to cry (in chorus). And then 
the vehement Mahodara, mounted (on horseback), rushed 
against Vcili’s son endued with energy. And aggrieved in 
consequence of the calamity that had befallen his brother, 
the strong Devantaka grasping a dreadful bludgeon, darted 
against Angada. And ascending a car resembling the Sun 
yoked with superb steeds, the heroic Tri^iras rushed against 
Vali's son. Then charged by those three powerful Rakshasas 
—crushers of the hauteur of immortals, Angada uprooted 
a tree furnished with gigantic branches. And as Sakra 
hurleth the mighty flaming thunderbolt, that hero— Angada 
— at once hurled against Devantaka that mighty tree having 
giant branches. And Tr^iras cut off that tree in pieces by 
means of shafts resembling serpents. And seeing the tree 
severed, Angada darted up ; and* then that foremost of 
monkeys showered crags and trees. And all those Tri^ras 
wrought with wrath cut off by means of whetted arrows ; 
and Mahodara snapped those trees with the end of his 
bludgeon. And then Tri^iras rushed against that hero— 
Vckli’s son — with shafts ; and Mahodara chased him,t mounted 
ou an elephant ; and struck Angada in thechest with tomarPS 
resembling the thunder-bolt. And Devantaka, enraged 
advancing, hit Angada with his bludgeon, and then, endowed 
with velocity, he swiftly turned away. And attacked 
simultaneonly by those three powerful Nairitas, the exceed- 
ingly energetic son of Vali possessed of prowess, did not 
feel any pain. And that impetuous one incapable of being 
oonquered, summoning his utmost vehemence, rushing on, 
peak a slap at hist mighty elephant. And thereat the 
elephant fell down in his very sight and expired. And then 

* The text has Angada , avoided for euphony. 

t The text has V&li’s son. 

i Mahodara’s. 



Digitized by 




yuddhakIndam. 



*339 



pulling out his tusks, the highly powerful son of VSli, darting 
against DevSntaka, dealt him a blow therewith in that en- 
counter. And thereupon that strong one overwhelmed like a 
tree buffetted by the wind, began to discharge blood profusely, 
looking like the hue of lac. And then cheering him, the 
exceedingly energetic and powerful Narantaka, violently 
whirling his bludgeon with might and main, hit Angada with 
it. And albeit struck with the bludgeon, the son of the lord 
of monkeys, going down on his knees, again darted up. And 
as he sprang up, Tri^iras hit at the temples of the son of 
the king of monkeys with three straight-speeding terrific 
shafts. And seeing Angada assailed by the three redoubt- 
able Rakshasas, Hanum&n and Nila proceeded (to his rescue). 
Theu Nila hurled a mountain-top at Tri^ras ; and thereat 
that son of Ravana severed it with sharpened arrows. And 
that mountain-top on being riven, dropped down, aflame 
and shooting out sparks of fire. And seeing him* yawning 
in joy, the stalwart Devantaka in that encounter pursued the 
Wind-god-s son with his bludgeon. And as he rushed on, 
that foremost of monkeys — Hanuman — dealt on the crown 
of his head, a blow resembling the thunder-bolt itself. And 
the mighty and heroic son of the Wind-god hit (at his 
antagonist) ; and that redoubted monkey also with his roars 
made the Rakshasas tremble (in fear). And thereat with 
his head crushed and cleft, and his teeth and eyes falling out, 
and his v tongue hanging down, that son unto the sovereign 
of the Rakshasas suddenly dropped to the earth, deprived 
of life. On that fierce and mighty RSkshasa warrior — that 
foe of the immortals. — having fallen in fight, the Three- 
headed one, waxing wondrous enraged began to shower 
terrific sharpened shafts on Nila's chest. And Mahodara, 
getting enraged, again swiftly mounted an elephant like the 
ray-furnished (Sun) mounting Mandara. Then even as a 
mass of roaring clouds poureth down showers enwheeled with 

* Tri^iras. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





1340 



rImXtana . 



levin on a mountain, he showered arrows right on Nila’s 
breast. Thereat showered with those shafts, that leader of 
monkeys Nila with his person pierced, had his body riven 
and was stupified by that exceedingly powerful one. Then 
that (monkey) possessed of tremendous vehemence, having 
regained his senses, uprooting a crag with a whole tract of 
trees, struck it at Mahodara’s head. And struck by that 
mighty enemy, Mahodara, broken down by the impetus of 
that rock, deprived of his senses, dropped down dead on the 
ground, like a cliff smit with the thunder-bolt. 

Seeing his uncle slain, Trigiras took up his bow ; and 
inflamed with fury pierced Hanuman with whetted arrows. 
And thereat the Wind-god’s son, enraged, hurled a mountain- 
peak (at his adversary). And Trigiras by means of keen 
arrows severed the same in shivers. And seeing the 
mountain-peak baffled, the monkey in the encounter began to 
shower trees on Ravana’s son. And Trigiras endowed with 
prowess by means of sharpened shafts cut off that descending 
arrowy shower in the sky and shouted (in delight). Then 
Hanuman flying into a fury, bounding to the welkin, with his 
nails ript the steed of Tri9iras,even as a lion cleaveth a power- 
ful elephant. Then taking a dart even as the Destroyer 
employeth the Fatal Night, Ravana’s son — Trigiras— 
discharged it at the offspring of the Wind-god. Thereat | 
catching the dart of resistless course as it descended from ' 
the sky, the powerful monkey snapped it and then shouted. 
And seeing that dreadful dart broken by Hanuman, the 
monkeys, transported with delight, sent up shouts, even as 
clouds rumble. Then upraising his sword, that foremost of 
Rakshasas — Trigiras —brought it down on the breast of the 
monkey-chief. Overpowered with the sword-blow, HanumSn 
— son unto the Wind-god, — endowed with energy, dealt the 
Three-headed one a slap on the head. And smitten with that 
slap, the highly powerful Trigiras, with his hands and attire 
dropping off, fell down to the earth, deprived of consciousness. 



ligitiaed by t^ooQie 




YUhDHAKlNDAM 



i34i 



Then that mighty monkey resembling a hill broke his sword 
as he fell, and roared, terrifying all the Rakshasas. But not 
brooking that uproar, that night-ranger sprang up j and 
springing up, he dealt a blow at Hanuman. And at that 
blow, the redoubtable monkey was wrought up with wrath ; 
and inflamed with rage, he smote that foremost of RSkshasas 
about his diadem. And then with a sharp sword the Wind- 
god’s son cut off his heads decked with diadems and furnished 
with ear rings ; even as Sakra had severed the heads of 
Tashtri’s son* Thereat even as burning stars, loosened, 
drop down from the course of Indra, the large organs of 
sense, and eyes flaming like glowing fire, and heads of that 
foe of Indra, dropped down to the ground. On Tri^iras — 
enemy of the immortals — having been slain by HanumSn 
endowed with the prowess itself of Sakra, the monkeys 
shouted, the earth shook, and the Rakshas began to fly on all 
sides. And seeing Tri^iras and Yudhyonmatta slain and 
seeing also the irrepressible DevSntaka and NarUntaka slain 
(in the encounter), that highly irascible and powerful 
Rakshasa — Matta — was transported with passion, and then 
took up a flaming mace entirely wrought with iron inlaid 
with gold ; frothy with flesh and gore ; mighty to behold ; 
gratified with the blood of foes ; with its end flaming in 
splendour ; decked with red wreaths ; and capable of striking 
terror into Airavata and Mahapadma and Sarvabhauma.f And 
flaming up like the Fire arisen at the end of a Yuga , that 
foremost of RSkshasas — Matta — wrought with fury, — rushed 
against the monkeys# Then the mighty and powerful monkey 
— Rishabha — springing up before R&vana’s son, stood 
before the hosts of Matta. And seeing that mountain-like 
monkey staying before (him), Matta, enraged, dealt him a 
blow on the breast. And smit with the mace, that foremost 
of monkeys, with his breast riven and trembling, began to 

* Vi‘9warupa. 

f Elephants of the cardinal points. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




RAMAYaNA. 



X34* 

bleed copiously. And regaining his senses after a long while, 
Rishabha — lord of monkeys — inflamed with wrath, pouting 
out his upper lip, gazed at MahSpargwa.* And then 
impetuously approaching the RSkshasa, that foremost of 
heroic monkeys resembling a hill, endowed with vehemence, 
clenching his fist, suddenly smote him with a blow on his 
breast. Thereat like a tree whose roots have been severed, 
he suddenly dropped on the ground, covered with blood. 
And thereupon, (Rishabha) swiftly snatched his dreadful 
mace resembling the rod of Yama himself ; and shouted. 
Only for a moment did he+ remain like one dead. Recovering 
his senses, the enemy of the immortals, looking like evening 
clouds in hue, suddenly springing up, attacked the son of the 
king of waters.J And thereat, he dropped down to the 
earth, senseless. In a moment regaining his consciousness, 
he again bounded up, — and whirling the mace resembling a 
peak of the foremost of mountains, in that encounter dealt 
(Matta) a blow therewith. And descending on the body 
of that dreadful one — the enemy of deities, sacrifices and 
Vipras — that terrific mace rived his breast $ and he began to 
bleed profusely, even as the lord of mountains discharges 
minerals and water. And taking the terrific mace of the 
high-souled (Matta) and swinging it again and again, 
(Rishabha) rushed (against the Rakshasas). And that 
high-souled one began to slaughter Matta* s forces in the field. 
And broken down by his own mace, Matta dropped down 
like a hill, with his teeth and eyes shrivelled up ; and he 
dropped to the earth deprived of strength and life, with his 
eyes paling. And on that Rakshasa falling, the RSkshasa 
forces began to fly. And on that brother of Ravana having 
been slain, that host of Nairitas appearing like the ocean in 



* Otherwise called Matta. — T. 
f Matta. 
t Varuna. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




yuddhakXndam. 



1 343 

grandeur, leaving its arms behind, — solely for life rushed 
away, like unto the deep riven (by the winds). 



SECTION LXX I . 



Seeing in sore straits his own mighty forces capable of 
making people’s down stand on end, — and seeing his brothers 
resembling Sakra in prowess, routed ; and seeing also his 
uncles brought down in battle, as well as his brothers— 
Yudhyonmatta and Matta — foremost of Rakshasas, that 
crusher of the pride of deities and Danavas — the exceedingly 
energetic Atikaya— resembling a hill, who had obtained from 
BrahmS, a boon in battle, was fired with wrath. Ascending 
a car effulgent like a thousand suns mingling their rays into 
a burst of brilliance, that enemy of Sakra, charged the 
monkeys. And stretching his bow, (Atik&ya) decked with a 
diadem and wearing polished ear-rings, proclaimed his name 
(among the monkey-ranks) and shouted in lofty tones. 
And with his leonine roars and the proclamation of his name, 
and the tremendous twang of his bow-string, he struck terror 
into the monkeys. Seeing the magnitude of his person, the 
monkeys thinking that it was Kumbhakarna who had come, 

— and affrighted thereat, sought the shelter of each other. 
And seeing his form like unto that of Vishnu when he 
displayed his threefold energy, the monkey-warriors seized 
with fear, began to scour on all sides. And on Atik&ya 
appearing before them, the monkeys, stupified in that conflict, 
saught the shelter of Lakshmana’s elder brother. And from 
a distance KSkutstha saw the mountain like Atik&ya ! 
mounted on the car and equipped with his bow, like unto roar 
ing clouds (seen) on the occasion of the universal disruption. 



Digitized by 




1344 



RAMKyaNA. 



And seeing that huge-bodied one, R&ghava struck with 
surprise, comforting the monkeys, addressed Bibhishana, 
saying, — “Who is this one resembling a mountain, furnished 
with a bow and having leonine eyes, that is stationed on 
a large car yoked with a thousand steeds, — he that with efful- 
gent sharpened darts and keen prdgas and tomaras, shineth 
like Mahe^wara environed by spectres — he that displaying 
his fatal tongue, appeareth splendid, surrounded with darts 
in his car ; like a mass of clouds graced with lightning. And 
his bows adorned and backed with gold all over, beautify his 
car even as Indra’s bow beautifyeth the firmament. And who 
is this foremost of Rakshasas and best of bowmen that 
embellishing the field of battle, approacheth on a car glorious 
as the sun ; who, displaying the ten cardinal points with his 
shafts resembling the rays of the sun, appeareth handsome 
with his peak of a banner bearing the figure of Rahu — whose 
bow bent in three places, emitting roars resembling the 
rumbling of clouds, and plated with gold, looketh like the 
bow itself of Satakratu ? And his mighty car furnished with 
a banner and ensign and bottom, and jhaving clatter 
resembling the roaring of clouds, hath four horsemen 
(attached to it). And there are on the car eight and thirty 
quivers and dreadful bows and yellow-golden bow-strings. 
And there are (in that car) two effulgent swords at his side, 
illumining it, — their hafts measuring four hands and their 
blades ten each. And that calm (warrior) wears red garlands 
about his neck, and resembles a mighty mountain. And a 
very Destroyer, he hath a mighty mouth, appearing like that 
of the Destroyer himself ; and lie looketh like the sun 
stationed on clouds. And with his arms adorned with golden 
angadasy he appeareth splendid like that best of mountains — 
the Himavan with its towering summits. And with his pair 
of ear-rings, his charming yet terrific countenance shineth 
like the full Moon entering into Punarva$u * O mighty-armed 

* The seventh lunar asterism. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1345 



one, tell me all about this foremost of Rakshasas, seeing 
whom the monkeys, overwhelmed with fear, fly away in all 
directions. ,, Asked by the king’s son — Rama of immeasurable 
prowess — the exceedingly energetic Bibhishana spoke unto 
Rama, informing him,— “The highly powerful king, Va^ra- 
vana’s younger brother of dreadful deeds, the high-souled 
Ravana — is the sovereign of the Rakshasas. This one is \ 
his mighty son, like unto Ravana himself in strength. He ^ 
serveth the aged, is of wide celebrity and is the prime of those 
versed in all branches of knowledge. And he is competent 
to ride horses and elephants, to wield the sword or draw 
the bow, — or in sowing dissensions, or giving away, or in 
counsel, — he reposing in whose arm Lank§. hath cast off fear. 
Know him to be Atikaya, son unto Dhanyairiali. Having 
adored the pure-souled Brahma with austerities, he hath 
obtained weapons, and hath defeated his foes^(in'fight).” 
‘Thou shalt be incapable of being slain by celestials and 
Asuras 1 — was the boon conferred on him by the Self-sprung; 
and he also gave him this celestial mail and this car resembl- 
ing the effulgent Sun himself. He hath vanquished (in 
battle) hundreds of deities and Danavas ; and he hath (always) 
protected the Rakshas, and destroyed Yakshas. And this 
intelligent one resisted the thunder-bolt itself of Indra ; 
and in encounter baffled the very noose of the king of 
waters. This one is Atikaya — foremost of Rakshasas ; and 
that son of Ravana is the humbler of the hauteur of deities 
and Danavas. Therefore, O best of persons, do thou 
endeavour thy best. This one with his shafts slaughtered 
the monkey-hosts before (us).” And then the powerful 
AtikSya entering that monkey-force, stretched his bow and 
shouted again and again. And the high-souled principal 
monkeys, seeing that (hero) possessed of a dreadful person, 
that best of" car- warriors — stationed on his car, rushed 
forward. And Kumuda and Dwivida and Mainda and Nila . 
and Sarabha dashed on at one time with trees and mountain- 
169 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




^346 



RAMA YANA. 



peaks. Thereupon that foremost of those skilled in weapons, 
the exceedingly energetic Atik§ya, severed those trees and 
rocks by means of shafts dight with gold. And in that 
encounter that powerful one possessed of a gigantic person, 
skilled in arms, pierced all those monkeys staying before him 
with arrows entirely made of iron, And agonised, having their 
persons pierced in that mighty conflict by that arrowy shower, 
they were incapable of resisting the same. And the Rakshasa 
terrified that host of monkey-heroes, even as an enraged lion 
priding in his youth terrifyeth a society of deer. And in the 
midst of those bands of monkeys, that lord of RSkshasas did 
not slay anyone without battle. And then springing up 
before Rama, that one furnished with his bow and quiver, 
addressed him in haughty words, saying, — “Stationed in 
this car holding the bow and arrows in my hands, I will 
not fight any that is ignoble. Him that hath strength, 
and that also understandeth this business, — let him to- 
day speedily give me battle.” Hearing his speech, that 
slayer of foes — Sumitr&’s son — was fired with wrath. And 
not bearing him, he sprang forward disregarding his anta- 
gonists words, and took up his bow. And flying unto fury, 
Sumitra’s son, darting up, took out arrows from his quiver, 
and stretched his mighty bow in front of Atikaya. And 
filling the entire earth and the sky and the ocean and all the 
cardinal quarters, — the terrific twang of Lakshmana's bow 
struck terror into the (hearts of the) night-rangers. And 
hearing the dreadful twang of the bow of Sumitra's son, the 
exceedingly energetic and powerful son of the lord of 
Rakshasas was struck with surprise. Then AtikSya, enraged, 
seeing Lakshmana advance, taking sharpened shafts, spoke 
unto him, — “Thou art a boy, O Sumitra's son ; and as such 
knowest not how to display prowess. Go thou. Why 
wishest thou to fight with me resembling Death itself. Not 
Himalaya itself or the firmament or the earth is capable of 
bearing the impetuosity of shafts shot by my arms. Thou 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



1347 



wishest to rouse a fire slumbering sweetly. Leaving alone 
thy bow, do thou return. Do not lose thy life by coming in 
contact with me. Or it may be that thou art proud ; and, 
therefore, hast no mind to return. Stay then. Renouncing 
thy life, thou shalt go to Yama's mansion. Behold my whetted 
arrows — crushers of the insolence of foes — resembling the 
weapon itself of the Lord,* — adorned with burnished gold. 
And even as a lion enraged sheddeth the blood of a mighty 
elephant, this arrow of mine resembling a serpent shall shed 
thy blood. ,, Having delivered himself thus, he fired with wrath 
set his shaft on his bow. Hearing in that encounter Atikaya’s 
wrathful speech fraught with hauteur, the highly powerful 
and intelligent son of the king possessed of exceeding 
grace, was transported with passion ; and he said, — “Thou 
canst not attain pre-eminence solely by virtue of thy speech. 
One cannot be a worthy person simply by say. O wicked- 
minded one, do thou display thy strength on me equipped 
with the bow and holding arrows in my hands. To-day shall 
my shafts decked in gold, drink thy blood flowing from thy 
person and issuing out of wounds inflicted by my arrows 
resembling darts. — ‘This one is a boy*, ‘thinking this, thou 
ought not to slight me. Whether I am a boy or an old+ man’ 
— death shalt thou know in the conflict. It was as a boy 
that Vishnu had overpowered the triune world with his 
prowess.” Hearing Lakshmana’s words, fraught with reason 
and high sense, Vidyadharas and ghosts, deities, Daityas and 
Maharshis, and the high-souled Guhyakas then beheld that 
marvel. J 

Then AtikSya, enraged, setting his arrow on his bow, shot 
it at Lakshmana, as if devouring up the welkin. Thereat, 
Lakshmana — slayer of hostile heroes — with a crescent sever- 



* Isvara — Siva . — His weapon is the trident. — 

t The commentator says the passage means — “Thou knowest (me) for 
death itself*. I prefer the sense given. — T. 

X The encounter that ensued between Lakshmana and Atiklya. — T. 



Digitized by 





1348 



RAMA YANA. 



ed that sharpened shaft resembling a venomous serpent, as it 
was descending. And seeing the shaft severed, like a serpent 
having its person cut off, AtikSya waxing exceedingly 
enraged, took up five arrows - 9 and the night-ranger discharged 
them at Lakshmana. Thereat Bharata's younger brother cut 
off the approaching arrows with whetted shafts. And having 
severed them with sharpened shafts, Lakshmana — slayer of 
hostile heroes — took up a sharpened arrow, as if flaming in 
energy. And taking it, Lakshmana set it on his excellent 
bow ; and drawing the latter, vigorously discharged the shaft. 
And that hero endowed with prowess hit that foremost of 
Rakshasas in the forehead with that shaft having bent knots, 
discharged from his bow drawn to its full bent. — And that 
arrow piercing the forehead of that dreadful Rakshasa, and 
smeared with blood, appeared like the lord of serpents in a 
mountain. And the Rakshasa, smarting under Lakshmana's 
shaft, showered, like the dreadful gateway of Tripura 
battered by Rudra. Then recovering himself and reflecting, 
he said * — ‘ Excellent well J By this discharge of thy shaft, 
thou approvest thyself as a foe in whom I can well glory .” 
Having spoken thus candidly, he, folding his hands at 
ease, and seated on the platform of his car, began to range 
in it. And then that foremost of Rakshasas began to take 
up, set, and shoot one, three, five, or seven shafts. And 
those shafts resembling Fate itself, plated with gold at the 
feathered parts, — and looking like the Sun himself (in 
splendour), — discharged from the bow of the lord of Rakshasas, 
lighted up the heavens. Thereat Raghava's younger brother 
by means of many a sharpened shaft calmly cut off all those 
vollies of arrows shot by the Rakshasa. And finding all 
those arrows riven in the encounter, that enemy of the lord 
of the immortals, Ravana’s son, was fired with wrath, and 
took up a whetted shaft. And then aiming that arrow, that 
highly powerful one suddenly shot it ; and with that, rushing 

* Chintaydmdsa— thought, I apprehend, means said in this connection. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDA M. 



*349 



on, hit SumitrS’s son in the chest. And struck in the encounter 
by Atikaya, the son of SumitrS began to bleed copiously, 
like a mad elephant discharging the temporal juice. And 
then that lord at once extricated the arrow ; and thep took 
up a keen shaft and fixed the same on his weapon.* 
And then he set a shaft (on his bow-string) reciting a formula 
for the Agneyat weapon ; and thereat his arrow as well as 
bow flamed up. Then the highly powerful Atikaya took up 
a RaudraJ weapon; and thereon fixed a shaft plated with gold 
at the feathered part, and resembling a serpent in sheen. 
And even as the Reaper hurleth his rod, did Lakshmana hurl 
that weapon inspired with divine energy, dreadful and 
aflame, — at Atikaya. And seeing that shaft set upon an 
Agneya weapon, that night-ranger discharged a Raudra 
arrow set upon a Solar weapon. And there like a pair of 
infuriated serpents, those arrows with their heads flaming 
in energy, baffled each other in the sky. And burning each 
other, the shafts fell on the earth ; and those best of arrows, 
shorn of brilliance and reduced to ashes, were deprived of 
their splendour. And having blazed in the welkin, those 
two fell down to the earth reft of their lustre, Then Atik&ya 
wrought up with wrath discharged an arrow called Aishika 
dedicated to Tashtri. Thereat the powerful son of Sumitra 
severed that shaft by an Aindra§ weapon. Seeing Aishika 
baffled, that Prince — son unto Ravana — fired with rage, fixed 
an arrow on a Y§mya|| weapon ; and then the night-ranger 
shot that weapon at Lakshmana. And Lakshmana resisted 
it by a Vayavya^lf weapon. And then as a mass of clouds 
poureth down showers, Lakshmana, enraged, poured volleys 

* i.e. the bow. 

f Belonging to the god of Fire. 

J Relative to Rudra. 

§ Belonging to Indra. 

|| What could this be like ? The commentator is silent over this import- 
ant point.— T. 

f Belonging to the Wind-god. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



! 35 ° 



RAMA YANA . 



of shafts on R£vana's son. Thereupon, hitting Atikaya, 
those arrows coming in contact with his mail, had their barbs 
broken, and fell down to the earth. And seeing them baffled, 
that slayer of hostile heroes — the renowned Lakshmana — 
began to shower shafts by thousands. And albeit showered 
with those arrows, that Rakshasa — the mighty AtikSya — in 
that encounter was not pierced by them on account of his 
impenetrable mail ; and that best of men failed to hurt him 
in the contest. Then approaching him, the Wind-god spake 
unto him, saying, — “This one hath received a boon from 
Brahm&, and is covered with an impenetrable mail. Pierce 
him with a Brahma* weapon. He cannot otherwise be slain. 
This one clad in mail and endowed with prowess is forsooth 
incapable of being slain by others.” Hearing the words 
of the Wind-god, Sumitra’s son like unto Indra in prowess 
took an arrow endowed with fierce impetuosity, and at once 
set it on a Brahma weapon. And on that sharp-headed 
best of arrows being fixed on that foremost of weapons, the 
cardinal quarters and the Moon and the Sun and the mighty 
planets and the sky were seized with affright; and the 
earth shook. And inspiring that arrow furnished with a 
feathered part and resembling an emissary of Yama himself, 
and fixing the same an his bow, Sumitr&’s son in that 
encounter discharged that shaft like unto the thunder-bolt 
at the son of the enemy of Indra. And in that conflict 
Atikaya beheld that shaft fair-feathered and having its 
feathered part dight with splendid diamonds, acquiring 
enhanced vehemence arising from its having been discharged 
by Lakshmana, — and hissing and rushing on with tremendous 
impetuosity. And seeing it, Atikaya swiftly resisted it with 
countless sharpened shafts. But endowed with the energy 
of Suparna himself, that shaft vehemently went to him. And 
seeing that shaft flaming and resembling the Fatal Destroyer 
himself, — coming, he, exerting himself to the utmost resisted 

f Belonging to Brahm&. 



Digitized by 



Google 





YZJDDHAKANDAM. 



135 * 

it with darts and rishtis and maces and adzes and javelins 
and arrows. But beating down all those weapons of wonder- 
ful forms, that arrow alive with flames, coming to the 
diadem-decked head of AtikAya, severed the same (in twain) 
And that head furnished with a corsalet, cut off by 
Lakshmana’s arrow, suddenly dropped to the earth, like a 
summit of Himav&n toppling (to the ground). Seeing him 
rolling on the earth, with his attire and ornaments scattered 
about, those night-rangers that survived were overwhelmed 
with grief. And with pale forces and distressed, they, 
fatigued in consequence of the thrashing they had undergone, 
suddenly began to cry in frightful accents. And on their 
leader having been slain, those night-rangers that were about 
(AtikSya), without waiting any longer, — overwhelmed with 
panic, rushed towards the city. And on their foe endowed 
with terrific process and incapable of being confronted, 
having been slain, innumerable monkeys filled with excess 
of joy, and displaying countenances resembling blown lotuses, 
paid homage unto Lakshmana working out their welfare. 



SECTION LXIXII. 



Hearing AtikSya slain by the high-souled Lakshmana, the 
king was filled with exceeding great anxiety and spoke thus, 
— “DhumrSksha exceedingly wrathful, — best of those equipped 
with all arms — and Akampana and Prahasta and Kumbha- 
karna — all these exceedingly mighty heroes — Rakshasas ever 
seeking warfare, conquerers of die forces of foes, and never 
defeated by antagonists, have together with their hosts been 
slain by Rama of untiring feats. And other Rakshasas 
having gigantic bodies and skilled in various arms, — countless 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




RAMA YANA . 



1352 

high-souled heroes — have also been brought down. These 
brothers were formerly bound by my son Indrajit of renowned 
strength and prowess with terrific shafts, obtained as boons. 
And I do not know by what power or superhuman virtue or 
stupifying energy did those brothers — RSma and Lakshmana— 
liberate themselves from those dreadful bonds, which could be 
loosed neither by celestials nor the highly powerful Asuras 
combined nor Yakyas, Gandharbas and Pannagas. And all 
those heroic Rakshasa warriors that marched forth at my 
bidding, have been destroyed by monkeys of marvellous 
might. Him see I not that can now slay Rama with Lakshmana, 
— that hero together with his forces and Sugriva and 
Bibhishana. Alack ! mighty must be RSma and wondrous/is 
his strength of weapon — he coming in contact with whose 
prowess, these Rakshasas have met with their deaths. Now 
let this palace be everywhere guarded by a vigilant garrison, 
— as also the agoka wood where Sita is being guarded. We 
should always be acquainted with the ingress and egress (of 
every person). And do ye, surrounded by forces, remain 
where there are garrisons. And the night-rangers should in 
the evening, at midnight and in the morning always watch the 
movements of the monkeys. The monkeys should by no 
means be slighted. And ye should know whether the enemy 
putteth forth (fresh) efforts, — and whether they advance or 
remain stationed where they at present are.” — Thereupon 
those exceeding mighty Rakshasas did as they had been 
desired. And having directed them, R£vana — lord of 
Rakshasas — bearing the dart of ire (in his heart), in forlorn 
guise entered his own mansion. And with the fire of his 
rage blazing up, the exceedingly powerful sovereign of the 
night-rangers, absorbed with the danger that had befallen his 
son, began to sigh momentarily. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



•353 



SECTION LX X 1 1 1 • 



Those Rakshas that remained after the others had been 
slain, swiftly informed RSvana that all those foremost of 
RSkshasas — Devantakaand the rest, Trifiras, Atikaya and 
others — had been slain. And suddenly hearing them slain, 
the king with his eyes charged with brine, thinking of the 
disastrous destruction of his sons and brolhers.was extremely 
agonized. Thereupon, seeing the king afflicted, and sunk in 
a sea of sorrow, that foremost of car-warriors — son unto the 
Rakshasa king — Indrajit, addressed (his sire), saying, — “O 
father, it doth npt behove thee to be overcome with this 
excessive grief, inasmuch as, O lord of Nairitas, Indrajit yet 
breaths. Smit by the enemy of Indra, (Raghava) can by no 
means save his life in encounter. To-day behold Rama along 
with Lakshmana with their bodies tom with my shafts, — 
lying down lifeless on the ground, having their persons 
covered with my sharpened arrows ! Hear this vow of the 
foe of Indra, never swerving and instinct with prowess and 
divinity,— this very day will I with unfailing shafts slay 
Rama along with Laksmana. To-day let Indra and 
Vaivapwata and Vishnu and Rudra and Sadhyas and Vai?was 
and men and the Sun and the Moon, behold my immeasur- 
able prowess, terrific like that of Vishnu at the sacrificial 
ground of V5li." Having spoken thus, that foe of the lord 
of celestials endowed with exceeding energy, taking the king’s 
permission, ascended a car having the velocity of the wind 
itself, yoked with asses, and furnished with every variety of 
weapons. And ascending the car, resembling the car of 
Hari himself, that exceedingly powerful repressor of enemies 
at once set out for the field of battle. And as that high-souled 
(hero) marched, he was followed by countless mighty 
(RSkshasas) breathing spirits ; bearing bows in their strong 

170 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




>354 



RAMA YANA 



bands. And some of those, resembling mountains, were 
mounted on elephants, and some on superb steeds, and 
some on bears, and some on beasts of prey, and some on 
lions and jackals, — and some of the Rakshasas endowed 
with dreadful vigor were mounted on crows, and some on 
swans, and some on peacocks, — they were equipped with 
pragas and maces and nistringas and axes and clubs. And 
all sides were filled with the blares of conchs and the sounds 
of kettle-drums. And then that enemy of the lord of celestials 
marched forth with impetuosity. And with an umbrella hued 
like the Moon, that destroyer of enemies appeared like the 
full Moon stationed in the sky. And that hero garnished 
in golden ornaments — that foremost of all bowmen — was 
fanned by an excellent and graceful golden chowri. And 
with Indrajit furnished with the splendour of the Sun 
himself, and possessed of peerless prowess, Lanka looked 
beauteous even as the firmament graced with the glorious 
Sun. 

Arriving at the scene of conflict, that highly powerful 
repressor of foes arrayed his forces aound the car. And then 
that foremost of Rakshasas with choice mantras duly 
offered libations unto Fire.* And that powerful lord of 
Rakshasas there worshipping Fire with fragrant wreaths 
and fried paddy, sacrificed unto it. And arms served for 
Kaga and Bibhitakas for fuel ; and there were red cloths and 
a ladle made of black iron. And spreading Fire there, 
with tomaras representing Kdga y he seized the neck of a 
living goat. And then the kindled smokeless fire blazing 
up brilliantly, displayed signs betokening victory. Thereat, 
with his right tongue whirling, the Deity of Fire 
himself looking like one made of gold,— arising, accepted 
the offering. And then that (R&kshasa) skilled in weapons 
acquired a Br&hma weapon (from that Deity), and inspired 
his bow and car with mantras. On that weapon having been 

* Hutabhokt&ram — eater of sacrificial offerings— -a, designation of Fire. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



x 355 



invoked,* and on (the god of Fire) also having been 
worshipped, the firmament furnished with the suns and stars 
and planets was afflicted with affright. Having worshipped 
(the god of Fire), that one endowed with the splendour of 
Fire itself, that one possessed of the prowess of the great 
Indra and gifted with inconceivable vigor, accoutred in 
bows and arrows and swords and having steeds and cars 
and darts, — disappeared in the sky. Then burning for 

battle, setting up roars went out the RSkshasa ranks, throng- 
ing with steeds and cars, and graced with pennons and 
standards. And they fell to slaughtering monkeys in the 
engagement with countless shafts, sharp, variegated and 
decorated 5 as also with tomaras and hooks . And Ravana's 
son, fired with wrath, seeing those night-rangers, addressed 
them, saying, — “Do ye, burning with a desire to destroy the 
monkeys, fight cheerfully.” Thereat all those RSLkshasas, 
eager for victory, smitting roars, covered the dreadful 
monkeys with showers of shafts. And environed by Rakshas 
in that encounter, het poured on the monkeys n&likas and 
nardchas and maces and clubs. And trembling in the 
encounter, those monkeys armed with trees at once began to 
shower rocks and trees on RSvana's son. Then the exceed- 
ingly powerful Indrajit, son unto Ravana, endowed with 
wondrous energy, pierced the bodies of the monkeys (with 
arrows). And fired with wrath, that (hero) rejoicing the 
R&kshasas with a single shaft pierced nine and seven monkeys 
in that encounter. And that invincible hero in that coflict 
mangled the monkeys with shafts resembling the Sun, 
decked with gold. And their persons pierced in that contest, 
and the mselves pained with those arrows, they began to fall 
down, giving up all intention of fight, like mighty Asuras smit 
by the celestials. And then waxing highly enraged, those 
considerable monkeys in that conflict hotly pursued (Indrajit) 

* i. e. on the deity presiding over that weapon, being invoked. 

t Indrajit. 



Digitized by 



ns6 



RAMA YANA . 



resembling the Sun himself and having terrific arrows for 
his rays. And all the monkeys, with their bodies riven and 
deprived of their senses, and bathed in blood and writhing 
in torments,— pursued (Indrajit). And putting forth their 
prowess in behalf of Rama, those monkeys, equipped with 
rocks in the encounter, who had set apart their very lives 
(for him), paused, shouting up loudly. And they in that conflict 
showered trees and crags and mountain-tops on Ravana’s 
son. And that destroyer of foes — the exceedingly energetic 
son unto Ravana — resisted that mighty shower of trees and 
stones capable of compassing destruction. Then that Lord 
pierced the monkey-hosts in the encounter with shafts 
resembling fire or venomous serpents. And piercing 
Gandhamadana with eight and ten sharp arrows, he wounded 
Nila stationed at a distance with nine shafts. And that one 
endowed with redoubtable prowess pierced Mainda with 
seven shafts capable of piercing into the pith ; and he 
pierced Gaja with five shafts in the encounter. And he 
pierced Jambavan with ten and Nila with thirty. And then 
with dreadful sharp shafts obtained as boons, he rendered 
Sugriva and Rishabha and Angada and Dwivida (almost) 
lifeless. And transported with passion, and resembling the 
Five arisen at Doomsday, Indrajit, harassed other principal 
monkeys with countless arrows. And in that terrific conflict, 
he agitated the monkey-hosts with swift-speeding shafts, 
resembling the Sun himself, deftly discharged (from his bow). 
Then in that encounter, leaving his army, Indrajit became 
suddenly invisible unto the monkey-hosts, — and began to 
shower fierce arrows, like dark clouds pouring rain. And 
with their persons torn by the arrows of the conqueror of 
Sakra, — slain by his power of illusion, — with their teeth 
uprooted, those mountain-like monkeys fell down in the 
.field, emitting frightful cries, — like a mountain smit with 
lndra’s thunderbolt. And in the conflict they could only 
see sharp pointed shafts among the monkey-ranks; but 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHA KA NDA M. 



*357 



that foe of the celestial chief — the Rakshasa, hidden by 
virtue of illusion, they could not discover there. And then 
the high-souled lord of Rakshas covered all sides with sharp- 
pointed shafts resembling the rays of the Sun ; and he rived 
the foremost monkeys. And whirling darts and nistraigas 
and axes, flaming and having the effulgence of Fire, — and 
furnished with flames shooting forth sparks, — he discharged 
them furiously at the forces of the sovereign of monkeys. 
And the monkey-leaders struck with Sakrajit’s shafts resembl- 
ing flames, appeared like laughing Kingukas. And some 
looking at the sky were struck at their eyes. And they 
gradually began to hide themselves in each other and drop to 
the earth. And that foremost of Rakshasas — Indraj it — with 
prdgas and darts and whetted arrows, inspired with mantras , 
pierced all those powerful monkeys, — Hanuman and Sugriva 
and Angada and Gandlnmadana and Jambavan and Sushena 
and Vegadar^in, and Mainda and Dwivida and Nila and 
Gavaksha and Gavaya and Kesari and Hariloman and the 
monkey Vidyutdanshtra and SuryySnana and Jyotimukha 
and the monkey Dadhimukha and Pavakaksha and Nala and 
the monkey Kumuda. And having pierced those foremost 
monkeys with golden-hued maces, he showered on Rilma 
and Lakshmana arrow's resembling the rays of the Sun. 
And showered with those vollies of arrows, Rama, with- 
out heeding that discharge resembling a very downpour, 
— reflecting, spoke unto LakshmSna, — “O Lakshmana, this 
lord of Rakshasas, this foe of the lord of celestials, having 
obtained the Brahma weapon, — after having brought down 
the monkey-hosts, are assailing us with sharpened shafts. 
And that high-souled heedful one, having been given a boon 
by the Self-sprung, hath rendered his dreadful body invisible. 
How can we slay him, w r ho is fighting with upraised weapons, 
but who hath hid his body. .The reverend Self-sprung, I 
deem, is incomprehensible. And this is his weapon, embody- 
ing his energy. Therefore, O intelligent one, do thou to-day 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




* 358 - 



RAMA YANA. 



along with me calmly bear this. And let this foremost of 
them all — this lord of R&kshasas — cover all sides with the 
showers of his shafts. And in consequence of this, the army 
of the monkey-king with its greatest heroes fallen, doth not 
appear to advantage. And seeing us also fallen senseless,— 
and desisting from fight with our joy and anger gone off from 
us, for certain will the enemy of the immortals, taking the 
Fortune of fight seek his home.” And assailed by Indrajit 
with networks of arrows, they were then sore distressed in 
the field. And having struck them with sadness, Indrajit 
from joy shouted in the encounter. And having thus worsted 
in battle that monkey-army and Rama along with Lakshmana, 
he speedily entered the city ruled by the hand of the Ten- 
necked one. And extolled by the Yatudhanas, he, filled with, 
delight, related everything unto his sire. 



SECTION LX X I V « 



^^_nd they* were rendered inert in the field ; and the 
army of the monkey-leaders was stupified, with Sugriva 
and Nila and Angada and J§LmbavSn, — and they did not show 
any signs of activity. Thereupon, seeing them dispirited, 
that foremost of intelligent persons— Bibhishana— cheering 
them up with his peerless speech, said, - f ‘Ye heroes of the 
king of monkeys, do not give way to feaf. This is not the 
time to indulge in grief at this place j for the sons of that 
noble one.t — inactive and depressed, and seeming to be 
wounded with the showers of Indrajit’s shafts, — are in reality 

* i. e. R&ma and Lakshmana. 
f Da9aratha. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YU D DHAKA NDA M. 



*359 



in this plight, for showing reverence unto the words* of the 
Self-sprung one. — On him the Self-sprung hath conferred the 
mighty Brahma weapon of unfailing power ; and the king's 
sons are doing honour to it by lying down on the field of 
battle. Why then do ye grieve now ?” Hearing the words 
of Bibhishana and honoring the Brahma weapon, Hanuman 
spoke as follows : — “The host of the quick-paced monkeys 
hath been slain by this weapon. Let us go and console them 
who are still living.*' And those two great heroes — Hanuman 
and that foremost of the Rakshasas, with fire-brands in their 
hands, began to range to and fro in the battle field. And 
they beheld there the earth strewn on all sides with monkeys 
lying down like so many hills and various shining weapons. 
And some of these monkeys were deprived of their tails, 
some of their hands, some of their thighs, some of their legs, 
some of their fingers, and softie of their heads. And blood 
was gushing out from the persons of some, and others were 
urinating out of fear. And Bibhishana and Hanuman be- 
held there Sugriva, Angada, Nila, Gandhamadana, Jambavan, 
Sushena, Vegadarshin, Mainda, Nala, Jyotimukha, and 
the monkey, Dwivida,— almost slain. And Bibhishana and 
Hanuman saw in the field seven and sixty kotis of fleet- 
footing monkeys slain (in battle) at the fifth part of the day 
by the darling of the Self-sprung. And surveying that 
host worsted, dreadful like the surges of the sea, Hanuman 
and Bibhishana began to search for J&mbav&n. And finding 
that heroic son of PrajSlpati, afflicted with natural decrepitude, 
aged, and resembling smouldering fire,— wounded with 
hundreds of shafts, Pulastya's son said, — “O noble one, hath 
not thy life been destroyed with those sharp shafts ?” 
Hearing Bibhishana's words, J5mbav5n— best of bears — 
evoking utterance \vith extreme effort, said, — “O foremost 
of Nairitas, endowed with exceeding prowess, I know thee by 
thy voice. Having my person pierced with sharp shafts, I 

* Mantra. 



Digitized by boogie 



1360 



RAMA YANA. 



cannot see thee with my eyes. Doth he through whom 
AnjanSL as well as MStar’^wa* are blessed with fair offspring,— 
doth that prince of monkeys — Hanuman — live ?” Hearing 
Jambavan’s speech, Bibhishana said, — ‘‘Why, passing by the 
son of the high and mighty ,+ dost thou enquire after the 
Wind-god’s offspring ? O noble one, thou dost not show that 
overflowing affection either for king Sugriva or Raghava that 
thou showest for the son of the Wind-god.” Hearing 
Bibhishana’s words, Jambav&n said, — “Hear, O foremost of 
Rakshasas, why I enquire after the Wind-god’s son. While 
this hero is alive, this force, albeit destroyed, liveth ; but if 
Hanuman is reft of life, although living, we are destroyed. 0 
child, if the Wind-god’s offspring, resembling his sire himself 
or (the deity of) Fire in prowess, is alive, there is hope for our 
lives.” Then approaching that aged one, HanumSn — son 
unto the Wind-god — saluted him humbly, holding Jambavan’s 
feet. Hearing Hanuman’s voice, that foremost of monkeys, 
with his senses sorely smarting, deemed himself as having 
regained his life. Then that exceedingly energetic one 
addressed Hanuman, saying, — “Come, O powerful monkey. 
It behoveth thee to rescue the monkeys. There is none else. 
Endowed with profuse prowess, thou art the greatest friend 
of these. This is the hour when thou shouldst display thy 
might. Any other see I not. Do thou cheer up this host 
consisting of bears and monkeys ; and do thou also heal the 
wounds of these two tormented by them. Bounding sheer over 
the main, thou, O Hanuman, shouldst repair to the Himavan — 
foremost of mountains. There thou wilt see that best of 
mountains — the golden Rishabha of terrific aspect, and, 0 
smiter of foes, the peak also of Kaila?a- Lying in the lap 
of these two, thou, O hero, O powerful monkey, wilt see 
the mountain of medicines, fraught with healing herbs of all 
kinds. On its summit thou wilt find four medicinal herbs 

* The Wind-god. 

t Vide Hamlet. 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



1361 



flaming ard illumining the ten cardinal quarters — vis., 
Mritasanjivani,* Vi£alyakarani,f Suvarnakarani,J and the 
mighty medicine, Sandhani. O Hanuman, providing thyself 
with’ these, thou shouldst come hither without delay. Do 
thou, O offspring of the Wind-god§ bringing back lives 
unto these monkeys, cheer them up.” Thereat Hanuman 
filled himself with energy, even as the Ocean heaveth with 
the force of the winds (blowing on its breast). And ascend- 
ing the summit of that mountain, 1| and hurting it with his 
tread, that hero — Hanuman — appeared like a second mountain. 
And crushed under the tread of that monkey, the mountain 
was dispirited ; and sore distressed, it could hardly contain 
itself. And the trees on it began to topple to the earth ; 
and on account of the vehemence of the monkey, they flamed 
up. And smitten by Hanuman, its peaks were scattered 
around. And monkeys could no longer dwell on that fore- 
most of mountains, which, being hard pressed (by Hanuman), 
was trembling all over, with its slopes covered with broken 
trees and rocks. And with her giant gateways shaking, and 
the doors of her edifices broken, that night Lanka, over- 
whelmed with fright, seemed to be dancing. And the 
offspring of the Wind-god, resembling a mountain itself, 
bringing that mountain to sore straits, agitated the entire 
earth with her Oceans. And hurting the mountain with his 
tread, he, opening wide his mouth resembling that of a mare, 
sent up loud shouts, terrifying the night-rangers. And 
hearing those tremendous roars as he kept emitting cries, 
the powerful Rakshasas were quite stupified. And bowing 
down unto the Ocean, that subduer of enemies, the Wind- 
god's son, endowed with dreadful prowess, began to ponder 

* Lit. reviving the dead. 

f Lit. healing wounds inflicted by darts. 

J Lit. transmuting any thing to gold. 

$ Gandhabahdtanaya — lit., son unto the bearer of smell— a designation of 
the Wind in Sanskrit. — T. 

lj Trikuta. 

171 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1362 



RAMA YANA. 



over the mighty mission with which he had been entrusted 
in the interests of RSghava. — And f then upraising his tail 
resembling a serpent, bending his back, contracting his ears, 
and opening his mouth looking like that of a mare, that one 
possessed of terrific impetuosity, bounded into the sky. 
And with the vehemence of his rush, — he carried away in his 
wake whole tracts of trees, and rocks, and crags, and inferior 
monkeys and after having been carried away some 
distance by the vehemence of his arms and thighs, they, at 
length losing their velocity, fell into the waters (of the Ocean.) 
And stretching his arms resembling serpents, the son of the 
Wind-god endowed with the prowess of Garurat coursed on 
towards the monarch of mountains, as if making all the 
quarters tremble. And seeing the sea with its hosts of 
billows rolling furiously, and with the confideracies of aquatic 
animals bewildered by the angry waters, he coursed on 
rapidly, like the discus discharged by the hand of Vishnu. 
And surveying hills and birds and pools and rivers and tanks 
and splendid cities and flourishing provinces, that one equal 
to his sire himself in celerity, held his way. And that hero— 
Hanuman — like unto his father in prowess, and incapable of 
being fatigued, vigorously proceeded along the orbit of the 
Sun. And that powerful monkey possessed of the speed of 
the Wind itself, and having mighty impetuosity, careered, 
making all sides resound with his roars. And remembering 
Jambavan’s words, that redoubtable monkey, son unto the 
Wind-god, possessed of terrific prowess, and resembling a 
mountain, suddenly saw (before him) the HimavSn ; 
furnished with countless cascades and numerous caves and 
rivulets; with splendid summits appearing like massess of pale 
clouds ; and graced with various trees. And arriving at that 
lord of mighty mountains, furnished with excellent towering 
golden summits, he saw the great sacred asylums (of the 

* Residing in the Trikuta mountain. 

f The text has, the Foe of serpents — an appellation of Garura 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



13G3 



ascetics), inhabited by the flower of celestial saints. 
And he saw Brahmako9a(«) and Rajat&layaW and SakralayaW 
and Rudra 9 arapramokshaW and HaySmanaW and the flaming 
Brahma9iras,(/) and the servants of Vaiva9wata.fe) And 
he saw the abode of the Fire-god, and the abode of Va^ra- 
vana and the effulgent Suryyanivandhana/*) and the abode 
of Brahma/*) and the bow of Sankara, and the navel of the 
Earth.O) And he saw Kaila9a of terrific aspect, and the stoned) 
of Himavan, and that bulI/O and the golden mountain, and 
that foremost of mountains furnished with all medicinal 
herbs, flaming, and illuminated with every kind of medicinal 
plants. And beholding that flaming mass of fire, the offspring 
of Vasava'sO*) emissary wondered. And bounding up to the 
lord of medicinal mountains, he fell to searching for the 
drugs. And that mighty monkey — the Wind-god's son — 
leaving behind a thousand yoyanas , began to range the 
mountain containing the divine remedies in its entrails. And 
those potent medicines, in that foremost of mountains, knowing 
(before-hand) that one was coming seeking for them, rendered 
themselves invisible. And not seeing them, the high-souled 
Hanuman was angered; and from wrath he set up roars. 

(а) The place of Hiranyagarbha. 

(б) The place of Rajatan&bha — silver-naveled — another form of Hiranya- 
garbha. 

(c) The abode of Sakra. 

( d ) The place wherefrom Rudra discharged his arrow on the occasion of 
the destruction of TripurA. 

(e) The place of the Horse-necked. 

(/) The place of the deity presiding over the Brahma weapon. 

(g) An appellation of Yama. 

(h) The spot where the suns meet. 

(/) The place of the four-faced Brahrnl. 

(j) The spot of Praj&pati. 

(k) On which Rudra sat when engaged in asceticism. 

(/) Which had been mentioned by Jlmbavdn. 

(m) The emissary of VAsava in his cloud-form is the Wind driving the 
cloud ; and the passage refers to Hanum&n. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1364 



RAMA YANA. 



And not brooking that, (Hanum&n) with eyes resembling 
glowing fire, addressed that foremost of mountains, saying, — 
•‘What is th is that thou hast decided on, that thou showest 
no compassion for R^ghava ? But, O lord of mountains, 
to-day witness thyself, overpowered by my arms and torn in 
pieces !” And (anon) on a sudden, he violently rooted up its 
summit with trees and elephants and gold, and furnished with 
thousand varieties of ore, — having its tops torn and its 
slopes aflame. And uprooting it, he sprang into (the bosom 
of the air), terrifying the worlds containing celestials and 
the lords thereof. And hymned by countless rangers of the 
air, that one endowed with the terrific impetuosity of Garura 
himself, taking that summit furnished with the splendour 
of the Sun, went along the orbit of the Sun. And near the 
Sun, that Sun-like one seemed to be another Sun. And 
with that mountain, the offspring of the bearer of perfumes 
appeared surpassingly grand, like very Vishnu equipped with 
the flaming discus having a thousand edges. And seeing 
him, the monkeys shouted; — and he also, seeing them, 
shouted in delight. And hearing their tremendous cheers, 
those residing in Lanka shouted still more dreadfully. And 
then the high-souled one dropped on that best of mountains in 
the midst of the monkey-forces ; and, bowing down unto 
the principal monkeys there, lie embraced Bibhishana. And 
then those sons of that king of men, smelling the perfume 
of that mighty medicine, were then and there healed of their 
wounds y and the heroic monkeys also sat up. And all the 
heroic monkeys were instantly healed and cured ; and those 
also that were slain (in battle), through the smell of that best 
of drugs, sat up, like persons risen after sleep at break of 
day. Ever since the monkeys and Rakshasas had begun to 
fight, for maintaining honor, all those R&kshasas that were 
slain there by the mighty monkeys, were thrown into the sea. 
Then that monkey, the offspring of the bearer of fragrance, 
endowed with terrific speed, took that medicinal mountain 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHAKA NDAM. 1365 

(bqcJv) unto Himav&n and again presented himself before 
Heim a. 



SECTION LX X V. 



Then the exceedingly energetic lord of monkeys, Sugriva, 
said unto HanumSn these words fraught with import,— 
•'Inasmuch as Kumbhakarna hath been slain as also the 
princes,* R 5 vana can no longer defend the city.f Now let 
those principal monkeys that are endowed with great strength 
and that are furnished with fleetness, taking fire-brands 
(in their hands) rapidly rush towards Lanka ” Then when 
the Sun had set and at the terrific front of Night, those 
foremost of monkeys marched towards Lanka, equipped with 
fire-brands. And charged at all points by numbers of 
monkeys armed with fire-brands, those fierce-eyed (Rakshasas) 
that guarded the gates. J suddenly fled away. And thereat 
(the monkeys) delighted set fire to gates and upper apart- 
ments and spacious high-ways and various by-ways and 
edifices. And the fire§ burnt their || mansions by thousands ; 
and mountain-like superstructures toppled headlong to the 
earth. And there burnt aguru , and sweet sandal, and pearls, 
and sheeny gems, and diamonds and corals. And there 

* Nishuditdh — slain , left out for euphony. 

f U panirhdram is a contested term. Kataka gives the sense adopted by 
me. Tirtha says it means ‘Ravana cannot give battle in the open field.' 
According to others, it means ‘He cannot offer truce to us. — T. 

% Arakshdh — according to some, means gates. According to others, a 
gulma or division of an army. — T. 

$ Hutabhuk — lit. eater of sacrificial offsprings — a designation of Fire. 

|J According to the commentator this refers to the fire lighted by the 
monkeys. I differ. — T. 



Digitized by 




1366 



RAMA YANA . 



burnt linen and fine silk and dvikas and various kinds 
of woolen cloths ; and vessels of gold, and weapons ; 
divers kinds of furniture, trappings and ornaments of 
steeds ; cords for tying elephants.; burnished ornaments for 
cars ; armour of warriors ; and hides of horses and elephants. 
And swords and bows and bow-strings and arrows and 
tomaras * and ankugasf and darts. And blankets and chowris 
and tiger-skins and musk and other things. And pearls and 
excellent gems ; and edifices all around. And there the fire 
burneth heaps of various kinds of arms. And then the fire 
burnt various kinds of curious structures, and the dwellings 
of R&kshasas and all householders. And there the fire 
flaming up again and again burnt down by hundreds and 
thousands the houses of the denizons of Lanka, — clad in 
curious golden mail; and wearing wreaths and ornaments and 
attires ; having their eyes wildly moving in intoxication ; 
reeling in drink 5 those whose paramours were dressed 
in flowing apparels ; or those wroth with their foes ; or 
baring maces and darts and swords in their hands ; or 
engaged in eating or drinking ; or asleep with their beloved 
on costly couches ; or who, agitated with fright, were hastily 
going taking their sons with them. — And that fire burnt down 
firm-based rich dwellings furnished with innumerable apart- 
ments, and garnished with golden Moons and crescents, — 
and mansions having graceful crests ; and variegated 
windows and daises raised there, embellished with rubies 
and lapises, and seeming to touch the Sun ; and piles 
resembling mountains in grandeur, — and resonant with the 
cries of Kraunchas and peacocks and the tinklings of 
ornaments. And the flaming gateways all round appeared 
like clouds in the rainy season lighted up by lightning, or 
like the peaks of a mighty mountain ablaze with a forest- 



* An Iron club. — T. 

t The hook used to drive an elephant.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1367 



conflagration. And superb damsels asleep in lofty edifices,* 
being burnt, cast away their ornaments and shrieked. And 
consumed by the fire, buildings began to drop down like the 
summits of a mighty mountain smit with the thunder-bolt 
of the thunderer. And those burning, appeared from a 
distance like the peaks of Himalaya aglow. And in 
consequence of those tops of the edifices burning and of the 
living flames, that night LankS, looked as if swarming with 
flowering Kin9ukas. And with elephant-riders, and elephants, 
and steeds let loose, Lanka appeared like the Ocean at the 
hour of Universal tumbling, — with its ferocious aquatic 
animals whirling in wild chaos. Sometimes, an elephant 
seeing a steed let loose, — was flying away in fear ; and 
sometimes a horse seeing a frightened elephant, was stopping, 
himself seized with fear. — And on Lanka burning, the mighty 
main with the reflection (of the conflagration) looked like an 
Ocean of red waters. And in a short time that city set on 
fire by the monkeys, looked like the earth glowing at the 
time of the Universal dissolution. And the cries of the 
females amidst the drift of smoke, heated by the flames, 
could be heard from an hundred Yoyanas. And as Rakshasas 
having their bodies burnt came out of houses, monkeys eager 
for encounter on a sudden sprung upon them. And the shouts 
of the monkeys and the cries of the Rakshasas made the ten 
cardinal quarters and the ocean and the Earth resound. 

And on those high souled ones — both R&ma and 
Lakshmana — having been cured of their wounds, possess- 
ing themselves in calmness, took up their excellent bows. 
And Rama drew that best of bows. And thereat there 
was heard a tremendous twang striking terror into the 
Rakshasas. And drawing his redoubtable bow, R5ma 
appeared like the reverend enraged Bhava, drawing his bow 
having sounds and instinct with Brahma energy. And the 
twang of Rama’s bow, drowning the roars of both the 

* Virndna , according to Rim&nuya, is a seven-storied edifice. — T. 



Digitized by U^ooQie 




RAMA YANA. 



1368 

monkeys and the Rakshasas, — was alone heard. And the 
ululations of the monkeys and the cries of the Rakshasas and 
the rattle of R&ma’s bow — these three filled the ten cardinal 
quarters. And with the shafts discharged from his bow, the 
gateway of the city resembling the summit of Kailua was 
crushed in pieces, scattered around on the ground. And 
seeing RSma’s shafts in cars and dwellings, the preparations 
for conflict were pushed on with great vigor. And in conse- 
quence of the foremost Rakshasas preparing for fight, and 
emitting roars, that night appeared like the Fatal Night 
itself. And the foremost monkeys were directed by the 
bigh-souled Sugriva, saying, — “Ye monkeys, do ye fight, 
approaching the gate lying at hand. But he that flyeth from 
his ranks, should be slain by main force”. As the principal 
monkeys stationed themselves at the gate, equipped with 
fire-brands, wrath took possession of Havana. And as he 
yawned, the wind (blowing) from his mouth), filled the ten 
cardinal regions ; and his wrath resembled that appearing in 
the person of Rudra. And wrought up with a mighty rage, 
he sent forth Kumbha and Nikumbha — both sons of Kumbha- 
karna — in company with innumerable Rakshasas. — And 
in accordance with Ravana’s command, Yupaksha and 
Sonitaksha, and Prajangha, and Kampana went with 
Kumbhakarna's sons. And, setting up leonine roars, he 
commanded all those highly powerful Rakshasas, saying, — 
“Do ye go this very day for battle.” Thus directed, those 
heroic Rakshasas, equipped with flaming weapons, went out, 
roar ing again and again. And the firmament was illuminated 
with the splendour of the ornaments of the Rakshasas and 
the splendour of their persons and the fire kindled by the 
monkeys. And there the light of the Moon and that of the 
stars and the brilliance of their ornaments, — combined, lighted 
up the welkin. — And the beams of the Moon and the brilliance 
of the ornaments and the flaming splendour of the planets 
emblazoned all round the forces of the monkeys and 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



1369 



R&kshasas. And the light of half-burnt houses, again, falling 
on the restless ripples of the sea, made it wear an extremely 
beautiful aspect. And those dreadful Rakshasa hosts, 
possessed of dreadful prowess and energy, were seen, — with 
ensigns and banners ; excellent swords and paracwadhasj* 
terrific steeds and cars and elephants rife with paths y \ and 
flaming darts and clubs and scimitars and yrasas and tomaras 
and bows ; bearing blazing prdsas ; ringing with the tinklings 
of hundreds of balls ; with their arms encased in golden 
networks ; flourishing axes ; whirling their mighty weapons ; 
fixing shafts on their bows; making the air swoon away 
with the perfumes of their wreaths ; extremely terrific ; 
swarming with heroes ; sending out sounds like those of the 
sea. And seeing the army of the RSLkshasas incapable of 
being coped with advance, the monkey-forces began to .move 
and send up loud cheers. And thereat that array of 
Rakshasas vehemently sprang forward before the force of the 
foe, like unto insects plunging into a flame. And whirling 
with their arms bludgeons and acanis , that army of Rakshasas 
appeared exceedingly grand. And the monkeys, eager for 
encounter, darted forward like maniacs ; and began to 
despatch the night-rangers with rocks and trees and clenched 
fist. And Rakshasas possessed of dreadful prowess with 
whetted arrows swiftly cut off the heads of falling monkeys. 
And the Rakshasas ranged there, with their ears torn with 
teeth, or their heads broken by blows, or their limbs crushed 
with the discharge of crags. And in the same way other 
grim-visaged night-rangers slew with sharpened swords 
the foremost of monkeys on all sides. And one about to 
slay another was himself slain by the latter; and one, about 
to bring another down, was himself brought down (by his 
adversary, and one that was railing at another, was in turn 

* A platoon consisting of one chariot, one elephant, three horse and five 
foot. — T. 

f A kind.of sword. 

172 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



1370 



RAMA YANA . 



rebuked by his enemy; and one who was going to bite his 
foe, was himself bitten by him. And one was crying ‘Give/* 
and his adversary anon giveth ; and another, again said, — 
‘I will give. Why puttest thyself to trouble? Stay. 1 Thus 
there did they accost each other. And there was waged a 
terrific encounter between the monkeys and the Rakshasas,— 
in which arms lay scattered about ; and armour and weapons 
strewn around ; and mighty prdcasf were upraised j and 
which was faught with blows and darts and swords and 
Kuntalas.% And in that conflict the Rakshasas slaughtered 
monkeys by tens and sevens. And then the monkeys 
hemmed in the R&kshasa-forces, with their apparels falling 
off and with their mail and standards strewn around. 



SECTION LXXVf. 



On that furious and destructive carnage proceeding, 
Angada, eager for encounter, approached the heroic Kampana. 
Thereat, challenging Angada in wrath, he assailed him with 
impetuosity. And Kampana dealt a blow to Angada with 
his mace ; and thereat, wounded with it, he reeled. Then 
regaining his senses, that energetic one hurled a mountain- 
top. Borne down by the blow, Akampana dropped down 
to the earth. And seeing Kampana slain in the conflict, 
SonitSksha mounted on a car, intrepidly rushed against 
Angada. And he then impetuosly pierced Angada with 
sharpened shafts, keen and capable of cleaving the body 



* Battle, 
f A bearded dart. 

% What could this be like ? The commentator is mute. Wilson has 
Kuntalikd — butter-knife or scoop. Kuntala may, however, mean a plough . — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKA NDA M. 



I 37 I 

and resembling the Fatal Fire itself in appearance, —with 
KshurasOO and KshuraprasW and NarSchasW and Vatsa- 
<lantas(<0 and SiliumkhasW and Karnis(/) and Salaste) and 
VipStas/^) and countless (other) whetted arrows. And the 
powerful son of Vali— Angada — endowed with prowess having 
his person pierced with arrows suddenly smashed (his 
adversary's) car and arrows and dreadful bow. And thereat, 
Sonit&ksha swiftly took up his sword and shield ; and without 
reflecting for a moment, that vigorous one sprang forward. 

And the powerful Angada, speedily bounding up, seized 
his enemy’s sword and holding the same with his hands 
shouted. And then hitting at (Akampana's) shoulder-blade, 
that powerful monkey — Angada — hewed him in twain, his I 
blow going obliquely down like the sacred thread. And 
taking that terrific sword, and shouting again and again, in 
the field, Vali's son rushed against other enemies. And then I 
strong and heroic YupSksha accompanied by Prajangha,— 
mounted on a car, wrathfully approached the mighty son of 
Vali. And taking an iron mace, that hero, Sonitaksha, 
adorned with a golden angada , — attaining a little respite, 
advanced against Angada. And that redoubtable hero, the 
powerful 8 Prajangha, also, accompanied by Yupaksha, fired 
with wrath, equipped with a mace, advanced towards the son of 
Vali endowed with exc eeding prowess. And placed between x 
those two — Sonitaksha and Prajangha — that foremost of 
monkeys appeared like the full Moon placed between the 
VisakhSs.O) And Mainda and Dwivida defending Angada , ^ 



(а) Arrows having razor-like edges. 

(б) Crescent-shaped shafts. 

(c) Arrows made entirely of iron. 

(d) Arrows resembling the teeth of calves. 

( e ) Arrows resembling the feathers of the Kanka. 

(/) Arrows furnished with two sides resembling cars, 
(g) Arrows with short leads. 

(A) Arrows resembling the tops of Karaviras — Tirtha. 
(i) The as t eris k * so named. = cA ft tf.J 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




137 * 



RAMA YANA . 



remained beside him, desirous of witnessing the encounter 
between those two (combatants). And fired with fury, those 
huge-bodied RSkshasas endowed with dreadful prowess, 
equipped with swords and shafts and maces, — being on their 
guard, fell upon the monkeys. And the encounter that took 
place between those three lords of monkeys combined (on 
one side), and the three redoubtable Rakshasas (on the other), 
was dreadful and capable of making people's down stand on 
end. And they,* taking up trees, hurled them in the conflict 
(against their antagonists) ; and the powerful Prajangha 
resisted all those with his swords. And (the monkeys) in the 
contest showered rocks and trees on the cars (of their 
enemies : and the exceedingly strong Yupaksha cut them 
off with vollies of arrows. And the powerful Sonitaksha, 
endowed wdth prowess, with his mace severed in the middle 
the trees which Dwivida and Mainda had uprooted and 
discharged. And summoning speed, Prajangha darted against 
Vali’s son, upraising a huge scimitar capable of piercing 
into the vitals of trees. And seeing him approach, that lord 
of monkeys possessed of exceeding strength and great 
prowess struck him with an A9wakarna tree $ and with a blow 
smote his antagonist on his arm holding a nistringa . And 
seeing the sword resembling a mace dropped to the earth, that 
exceedingly mighty one clenched his fist into a blow like 
unto the levin ; and that one, endowed with wondrous energy, 
smote in the forehead that foremost of monkeys possessed 
of redoubtable prowess. And thereat he for a moment was 
staggered. And then recovering his senses, the energetic 
and powerful son of Vali by means of his clenched fist severed 
Prajangha’s head from his body. Thereat Yupaksha, seeing 
his uncle slain in battle, with his eyes filled with tears, 
finding his shafts exhausted, swiftly descended from his car 
and took a sword. And finding Yup&ksha charge, Dwivida, 
waxing wroth, speedily smote him on the breast j and that 
* The monkeys. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1 373 



powerful one also seized him. And finding his brother taken, 
the highly energetic Sonitaksha then dealt the mighty 
Dwivida a blow in the chest. And overcome by that blow, 
that one endowed with great strength, shook ; and Dwivida 
seized his antagonists upraised mace. In the meanwhile 
Mainda came to the side of Dwivida. And Sonitaksha and 
Yup&ksha, bestirring themselves, began to vehemently and 
forcibly drag and pull those (two) monkeys. And Dwivida 
with his nail tore SonitSksha’s face; and that powerful one 
violently bringing him down to the earth, pressed him with 
might and main. And fired with wrath, Mainda — foremost 
of monkeys — grasped Yupaksha with his arms ; and that one 
dropt down dead on the earth. And thereupon the force of 
the lord of the Rakshasas, having its foremost heroes slain,— 
and aggrieved thereat, went to where Kumbhakarna’s son 
was. And then cheering up the flying forces, that best (of 
Rakshas), — the energetic Kumbha — seeing that Raksha host 
with its mighty heroes slain by highly powerful monkeys 
crowned with success, began to perform difficult feats 
in the encounter. And heedfully taking his bow, that first 
of bowmen discharged shafts resembling venomous serpents 
capable of piercing the body. And his excellent bow with 
shafts shone resplendent like the very bow of Indra himself 
affluent with the splendour of Airavata and lightning. And 
then drawing his bow to its utmost bent, he hit Dwivida with 
a feathered shaft knobbed with gold. And suddenly wounded 
with it, that best of monkeys having the splendour of Trikuta, 
fell down senseless to the earth, stretching his legs wide. 
And Mainda, seeing his brother, broken in mighty encounter, 
furiously rushed forward, taking a gigantic crag ; and that 
one possessed of great strength, hurled it at the Rakshasa. 
And thereat Kumbha severed that crag with fire shafts 
discharged (from his bow). And then aiming other fair- 
headed arrows resembling venomous snakes, that exceedingly 
energetic one smote Dwivida’s elder brother in the chest. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1374 



RAMA YANA . 



And struck (with those arrows), that leader of monkey- 
bands, Mainda, with his marrow pierced therewith, fell down 
to the earth, deprived of his senses. And Angada seeing 
his uncles* endowed with exceeding prowess, overpowered, 
darted vehemently at Kumbha staying with bow upraised. 
And as he descended, Kumbha pierced him with fire shafts; 
and as one pierceth an elephant with tomaras, he also pierced 
(Angada; with three other arrows. And the powerful 
Kumbha pierced Angada with a great many arrows, sharp- 
pointed, whetted, keen and ornamented with gold. And Vali's 
son Angada, albeit pierced all over in his person, did not 
shake ; and he kept showering on hist head stones and trees. 
And the graceful son of Kumbhakarna cut off and cleft all 
those (stone and trees) discharged by Vali,s son. And seeing 
him spring up, Kumbha pierced that monkey-leader on the 
grouud with shafts, even as one assaileth an elephant with 
fire-brands. And blood gushed out of his closed eyes. 
And then covering his eyes with his hand, Angada with 
another took a sala that was hard by. And placing 
on his breast the sala furnished with shoulders, and 
pulling its branches and bending its top, he cleared it of 
its foliage, in that mighty encounter. And then in the sight 
of all the Rakshas he violently discharged that tree resembl- 
ing the very banner of Indra and appearing like Mandara 
itself. And thereat hef severed it with seven sharp shafts 
capable of piercing the body. And Angada experienced a 
sharp pang and fell down deprived of his senses. And seeing 
the invincible Angada down like ebbing sea, the foremost 
monkeys informed Raghava of it. And Rama, hearing that 
Vali's son had come to grief in terrific fight, directed 
the principal monkeys, headed by jSmbavan. And hearing 
Rama’s command, the hionkeys, fired with wrath, charged 

* Maternal uncles. 

t Kumbha’s. 

I Kumbha. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDAM. 



1 375 



Kumbha, staying with his bow upraised. And those powerful 
monkeys, with their eyes crimsoned with choler and bearing 
rocks and trees in their hands, were engaged in defending 
Angada. And jSmbavan and Sushena and the monkey, 
Vegadar^, wrought with wrath, darted against that hero — son 
unto Kumbhakarna. And seeing them spring forward; he 
covered up those exceedingly mighty lords of monkey, with 
showers of shafts, even as a crag obstructeth the course of a 
current. And even the great deep cannot see his own 
shores, those high-souled lord of monkeys, coming within the 
range of his arrows, could not even see. And seeing those 
monkeys sore distressed by the shafts, the king of the 
monkeys, Sugriva, in that conflict taking his brother’s son 
on his back, rushed against the son of Kumbhakarna, even as 
a powerful lion rusheth at an elephant ranging on the slopes 
of a mountain. And that mighty monkey, uprooting many 
an agwakarna and other mighty trees of various kinds, 
discharged them (at the foe). And by means of his sharp 
arrows the graceful son of Kumbhakarna cut off that down- 
pour of trees covering the welkin; and incapable of being 
resisted. And being baffled those trees looked like gataghnis . 
And seeing that shower of trees riven by Kumbha, the 
graceful lord of the monkeys endowed with exceeding strength 
and prowess, did not feel any mortification. And suddenly 
attacked, he bearing those arrows, seized Kumbha’s bow 
resembling in resplendence the very bow of Indra. And 
swiftly bounding up and performing that feat difficult of being 
achieved, he, exceedingly enraged, addressed Kumbha 
resembling an elephant shorn of his tusks, saying, — “O elder 
brother of Nikumbha, marvellous are thy might and the 
force of thyself as well as the modesty and prowess that are 
thine and Ravana’s. And, O thou equal unto Prahrada or 
Vali or the slayer of Vritra or Varuna or Kuvera ! thou alone 
walkest in the wake of thy yet mightier father. As mental an- 
guish doth not dog one that hath controlled his senses,— the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




RAMA YANA . 



1376 

celestials cannot cope in conflict with thee alone, O repressor 
of foes, O of mighty arms, bearing thy dart in thy hand. O 
thou of high intelligence, put forth thy prowess ! and do thou 
also witness my work. It is only by virtue of the boon he 
hath received, that thy uncle can bear the deities and the 
Danavas. But Kumbhakarna copeth with the immortals and 
Asuras by means of his native might. And in the bow 
equal to Indrajit himself and in power equal to Rlvana, thou 
now in might and energy art the foremost of R&kshasas. 
And to-day let all creatures witness the mighty and 
wonderful encounter in conflict between thee and me, like 
unto the meeting of Sakra and Samvara. And unparal- 
leled is the feat thou hast performed ; and thou hast 
displayed thy skill in weapons. And heroic monkeys 
endowed with dreadful vigor, have been brought down by 
thee. And, O hero it is only because of the apprehension* of 
censure of the people that I do not slay thee who art fatigued 
in consequence of the acts that thou hast performed. And 
reposing from fight, do thou see my strength !” And being 
thus honored (by Sugriva) with fair speech, (Kumbha) flamed 
up like a flame into which oblations have been poured. 
And then Kumbha seized Sugriva by the arms. And like 
two elephants in rut, they sighing momentarily, fastened on 
each other’s person, and possessed each other, — and from 
fatigue emitting from their mouth flames mixed with vapour. 
And with the stamping of their feet, the earth was rent into 
rivers, and the main was waxed, with its billows surging 
furiously. Then Sugriva lifting up Kumbha clean, violently 
plunged him into the salt wash, making his eyes acquainted 
with the locality of the deep. And in consequence of 
Kumbha’s plunge, the waters heaving up, rolled on all 
sides like the Vindhya or Mandara. Then springing up, 
and bringing Sugriva down, Kumbha, transported with wrath 

* i.e. Lest people should censure me, saying,— ‘Sugriva slew, Kumbha 
when he was fatigued in fight. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDHA KAN DA M. 



1377 



dealt a blow on his chest, like unto the levin. And thereat 
his skin was rent, and blood began to gush out, — and the 
impetus of that blow broke Sugriva’s bones. And the 
vehemence (of the blow) caused a great fire to blaze up at 
that spot ; even as the thunder-bolt smiting the mountain 
Meru, maketh place blazed. And the mighty Sugriva — 
foremost of monkeys — sorely handled by him, fastened his 
fingers into a box resembling the thunder-bolt, and furnished 
with all the effulgence of the solar disc having a thousand 
rays. And then that powerful one made that blow descend 
right on Kumbha’s breast. And agonised with that stroke, 
Kumbha reft of his senses, dropped like unto a fire that hath 
lost its brightness. And overpowered by that blow, the 
Rakshasa anon dropped down, like unto the bright LohitSnga 
dropping from the firmament urged on by Destiny. And the 
aspect of the falling Kumbha with his breast broken by the 
blow, appeared like that of the Sun routed by Rudra. 
And on his being slain, in encounter, by the foremost of 
monkeys endowed with terrific strength, the earth with her 
hills and woods, shook ; and a mighty fear took possession 
of the Rakshas. 



SECTION LXXVII. 



^EEING his brother slain by Sugriva, Nikumbha, gazed 
at the lord of the monkeys, as if consuming him with his 
passion. And then that one endowed with calmness, grasped 
a bludgeon entwined with wreaths, and furnished with an 
iron ring measuring five fingers, and resembling the top of 
the Mahendra 3* plated with gold and embellished with 

* The mountain, so named. 

173 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



RAMAYANA. 



1378 

diamonds and lapises, — and looking like the rod of Yama 
himself ; dreadful, and capable of removing the fear of the 
Rakshas. And whirling this, that highly powerful one, 
resembling the banner itself of Sakra in energy, Nikumbha 
possessed of terrific strength, with his mouth wide open, set 
up shouts. And with gold adorning his breast, and angadas 
placed on his arms and a pair of curious and variegated ear- 
rings, Nikumbha, with his ornaments and that same bludgeon, 
appeared beautiful like a mass of roaring clouds laughing 
with lightning and furnished with the iris. And the head of 
that huge-bodied heroe’s parigha undid the conjunction of the 
Seven* Winds and appeared! like a noiseless and smokeless 
flame. Along with the gyration of Nikumbha’s parigha 
the whole welkin, together with the excellent city J of the 
Gandharbas, and the planets, stars and the moon, began to 
whirl. And Nikumbha was hard to approach like unto the 
fire of dissolution, being resplendent with the brilliance 
of parigha and other ornaments and having his anger for 
its fuels. And the Rakshasas and monkeys did not dare 
stir even out of fear. And the heroic Hanuman, spreading 
his breast, stood before him. And thereat the powerful 
(Nikumbha) having long-arms§ threw his parigha resembling 
the Sun at the breast of that powerful one. And falling 
on the firm and spacious breast of Hanuman it was broken 
into hundred pieces. And the broken portions, being 
scattered, appeared like hundreds of fire-brands in the sky. 
Like unto a mountain standing still even at the time of an 
earthquake that mighty monkey was not moved albeit 
struck with the parigha . Being thus hurt that highly powerful 
Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, with great velocity 
clenched his fist. And with this, the powerful (monkey) 

* This indicates the lepgth of the Parigha. 

f This might refer to Kumbha as well. 

X Some say Vitapabati and some say AlakA. 

f Lit. arms resembling parighas . 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHA KA NDAM. 



*379 



gifted with great impetuosity, and resembling the wind in 
prowess, struck Nikumbha on his breast. And with that 
fist, his (Nikumbha’s) armour* was riven and blood gushed 
out. And a light rising out of his breast suddenly disappeared 
like unto lightning disappearing in a mass of clouds. And 
being struck with his (Hanuman's) fist Nikumbha was greatly 
moved and restoring himself attacked the mighty Hanuman 
and pulled him up. And beholding in conflict the terrible 
and powerful Hanuman pulled up by Nikumbha, the 
residents of Lanka began to shout with joy. Being thus put 
to shame by that Raksha, HanumSln the son of the Wind, 
struck him with his iron fist. And releasing himself from the 
grasp of Nikumbha, Hanuman the Wind-god's son instantly 
planted his foot on the earth. Inflamed with ire, he, throwing 
down Nikumbha, began to crush him ; and gifted with vehe- 
mence, he, with great impetuosity, leaped up and sat on the 
breast (of the Raksha). And holding his head with two hands, 
he, emitting loud roars, displaced his head. Nikumbha being 
thus slain in conflict by the Wind-god's son, there ensued 
a terrible conflict between the highly enraged armies of the 
son of Da£aratha and the lord of Rakshasas. And Nikumbha 
being deprived of his life, the monkeys began to shout — as if 
resounding all the quarters. And with it the whole earth 
moved and the abode of the celestials dropped down. And 
the Rakshasa-hosts were greatly terrified. 

* Some texts read charma (skin) in the place of Barma — (armour) i, e. his 
skin was rent — This equally indicates Hanum&n’s strength. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



RAM A YANA. 



13S0 



SECTION LXXVIII. 



Beholding Kumbha and Nikumbha slain, Ravana was 
excited with ire like unto flaming fire. And being beside 
himself, simultaneously with wrath and grief Ravana* spoke 
unto Makar3ksha, Kliara s son, having spacious eyes, saying, 
— “O child, do thou proceed at my command with the 
army and destroy RSghava and Lakshmana witli all the 
monkeys.” Hearing the words of Ravana, Khara’s son, 
Makaraksha, proud of his own prowess, delightedly spoke unto 
the night-ranger, saying, ‘‘Be it so.” And saluting and 
circumambulating the Ten-necked one, that hero, at Havana's 
behest, issued out of the house. And Khara’s son spoke 
unto the commander who was near him, saying,— ‘‘Do thou 
speedily bring the chariot here and all the soldiers.” And 
hearing his words, that commanding night-ranger, soon led 
before him the army and the chariot. And going round the 
chariot and addressing the charioteer that night-ranger 
(MakarSksha) said, — ”0 charioteer, do thou soon drive the 
chariot.” And Makar&ksha addressed those Rakshasas, 
saying, — “0 Rakshasas ! do ye all fight before me. I have 
been commanded by the high-souled Ravana, the lord of 
Rakshasas, to slay both Rama and Lakshmana in conflict. I 
shall slay to-day, O night-ranger, with my excellent arrows, 
Rama, Lakshmana, Sugriva and all other monkeys. Like 
unto fire consuming dry fuel, shall I to-day slay the host of 
monkeys with my darts.” Hearing those words of Maka- 
raksha, the mighty night- rangers, (addressed themselves for 
fight). They were armed with various weapons, cautious ; 
assuming shapes at will, crooked, having fearful teeth, coppery 
eyes ; roaring like elephants, having dishevelled hair and 

♦ Nairita is another name of R&vana. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHA KA NDA M. 



1381 



terrible. And encircling the huge-bodied son of Khara, those 
gigantic (Rakshasas) began to proceed, delighted and 
moving the earth (with the weight of their persons). There 
arose a terrible noise on all sides from the sound of conches, 
and thousands of bugles, and from the moving of the arms of 
the heroes. And all on a sudden the reins slipped off (the hands 
of) the charioteer and the flag of the Rakshasas dropped 
down. And the course of the steeds was thus slackend and 
they began to move slowly and poorly with their heads droop- 
ing down. There blew a terribly rough wind mixed with 
dust when the fearfully wicked-minded Makaraksha’s issued 
out for battle. Those powerful Rakshasas neglecting those 
bad omens proceeded towards where Rama and Lakshmana 
were. They were all black like unto clouds, elephants and 
buffaloes, and had marks of swords and maces on their 
persons. And all those night-rangers were skilled in the 
art of warfare and began to range to and fro (in the battle 
field) saying, “I shall go first.” 



SECTION LX X I X • 



Beholding Makaraksha out for battle, those foremost 
monkeys, leaping on a sudden, addressed themselves for fight. 
Thereupon ensued a terrible conflict, capable of making 
one’s down stand on end, between the night-rangers and the 
monkeys like unto one between the celestials and Danavas. 
And those monkeys and night-rangers crushed each other 
down with trees, darts, maces and parighas . And those 
night-rangers began to assail those foremost of monkeys 
with sakti ,* swords, maces, kuntas , tomaras , pattigas , 

* A short arrow thrown from the hand or shot through a tube. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




138a 



RAMA YANA . 



Vindipalas ,* arrows, nooses and clubs. Being thus assailed 
with fearful arrows by Khara’s son, those monkeys, stricken 
with fear, fled away. And beholding the monkeys fly away, 
the victorious R&kshasas began to roar like excited lions. 
The monkeys thus flying away to all quarters, Rama with 
a downpour of shafts assailed the Rakshasas. And beholding 
the Rakshasas thus overpowered, the night-ranger Makaraksha, 
excited with the flame of ire, said, — “Stay, O Rama, let us 
both fight with each other $ I shall take thy life with 
sharp arrows discharged off my bow. Thou didst slay my 
father in the forest of Dandaka. Remembering thy action 
and finding thee before, my ire is excited. O Raghava ! O 
Vicious souled one ! My limbs are being burnt (with wrath) 
for I did not see thee then in that mighty forest. O RSma, 
by my good luck, I have got thee to-day, like unto a hungry 
lion desiring to have other animals. Being despatched by 
my arrows to the world of devils, thou shalt live with those 
heroes, who had been killed by thee before. What is the use 
of speaking more, O Rama, do thou hear my words. Let all 
the people behold thy as well as my prowess in the battle- 
field. Either with weapon or with clubs, in whatever thou 
art expert, do thou fight with me in the battle-field, O Rama.” 
Hearing the words of Makaraksha, R&ma, Da9aratha , s son, 
smiling, replied to the words of the babbler. “O Raksha, what 
is the use of idle prating ? None can achieve success in a 
battle with idle words — but with fighting. I slew in the 
forest of Dandaka thy father with fourteen thousand 
Rakshasas, Tri^ira and Dushana. O vile one, thou being 
slain to day, with thy flesh, vultures and crows, having sharp 
beaks and nails, and jackals>shall be satisfied.f Being thus 



* An Iron spear or dart. — T. 

f Here is another sloka, which is to be found in all N. W. P. texts and 
in one or two texts published in Bengal — but it has been omitted by many for 
it conveys the same meaning as the previous sloka; the meaning is : — And the 
birds drinking thy blood shall fly away to various quarters. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1383 



addressed by R5ghava, the mighty Makaraksha, began to 
dart sharp arrows towards him in the battle-field. And 
Rama, with his shafts, sundered into several pieces, those 
arrows. And being thus rendered useless those arrows, 
feathered in gold, fell down on the earth. Then there arose 
a terrible conflict between the Rakshasa Khara’s son and 
Da^aratha’s son. And there were audible in that battle- 
field, the outcry of the heroes and the twang of the bows 
stretched by their hands; like unto the muttering of the 
clouds in the sky. And to beheld that wondrous conflict, 
the celestials, Danavas,Gandharbas, Kinnaras and the mighty 
serpents stationed themselves in the sky. They were wounded 
with the arrows discharged by each other and their strength 
was doubled. And they began to fight in that battle-field 
one attacking and the other withstanding the attack. And 
in that conflict the Rakshasa sundered the shafts discharged 
by R&ma. And likewise Rama severed into several pieces the 
arrows shot by the Rakshasa. All the quarters were covered 
with arrows and nothing on earth or in the sky was visible. 
Thereupon being excited with ire, Raghava of long arms 
sundered his (Rakshasa’s) bow in conflict and with eight 
Ndrachas pierced the charioteer. And with arrows Rama 
sundered the chariot and killing the horses brought them 
down. And the night-ranger MakarSksha was brought down 
on the earth from the chariot. He then again rose up with 
a dart in his hand creating terror unto all creatures and 
resembling the Fire of Dissolution in resplendence. It was 
a terribly huge dairt conferred on him by Siva, shining 
in the sky in its native brilliance and like unto another 
weapon of destruction.* And beholding which dart even 
the celestials fly away in fear to different quarters. And 
taking up that huge flaming dart, the night-ranger, being 
excited with ire, hurled it at the high-souled Raghava. 

* This refers to the weapon used by Siva for destruction — for Siva, ac- 
cording to the Hindu Mythology is the God of destruction. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





* 3 8 4 



RAMA YANA 



And RSghava, with four shafts, sundered that dart, in 
the sky, flaming and hurled at him by the son of Khara. 
And that flaming dart, feathered in gold, being splintered 
into several pieces by llama’s arrows fell down on earth like 
a huge fire brand. And beholding that dart baffled thus 
by R£ma of unwearied actions all those, stationed in 
the welkin began to shout, “Well done ! Well done ! !.” 
And beholding his dart thus sundered, the night-ranger 
Makaiaksha clenching his fist spoke unto Kakutstha, saying, 
“Stay! Stay !” And seeing him advance thus, the 
descendant of Raghu, smiling, fixed a fiery arrow on his 
bow. And with that arrow the Raksha was slain by 
Kakutstha in battle. And having his heart pierced he fell 
down and died. And beholding Makaraksha thus slain 
all the Rakshasas, being afraid of Rama’s arrows, proceeded 
towards LankS. And seeing that night-ranger, the son of 
Khara, slain by Rama’s arrows, like unto a 'mountain clept 
by a thunder-bolt, the celestials were greatly delighted. 



SECTION LXXX. 



Hearing of the destruction of MakarSksha, the heroic 
RSvana, being excited with ire, began to grind his teeth. 
Being thus angered, and thinking within bimself what steps 
to take, he ordered his son Indrajit to proceed to the battle- 
field. “0 hero, gifted with great prowess as thou art, do 
thou, hidden (in clouds) or appearing before them, slay the 
two heroic brothers Rama and Lakshmana. Thou didst defeat 
in conflict Indra of unequalled prowess. Shalt thou then 
neglect to slay men as they are ?” Being thus addressed 
by the lord of the Rakshasas and obeying his father’s 



Digitized by 




YU D DJIA KA NDA M. 



*385 

command, Indraj it proceeded towards the sacrificial ground 
to satisfy Fire (with oblations). There came some she-demons 
with crimson turbans and waited respectfully where Ravana’s 
son was offering oblations unto Fire. In that sacrifice the 
weapons were the leaves of sara* bibkutaksf were fuels, 
and there were brought crimson clothes and sruvas% made 
of black iron. And spreading fire on all sides with sara 
leaves and tomaras , Jndrajit) caught a living goat, all black, 
by the neck. And the fire, with oblations of sara y became 
greatly blazed and devoid of smoke. And there were visible 
many good omens indicating victory. The flame of the 
fire was like unto gold, and moving Southwards began 
* to receive offerings of clarified butter. And thus offering 
oblations unto fire and unto celestials, DcLnavas and 
Rakshasas, he ascended an excellent car and soon disappear- 
ed. It was drawn by four horses and a huge bow, set 
with sharp arrows, appeared beautiful on that excellent car. 
The chariot was brilliant with its own native resplendence, 
adorned with gold and painted with the figures of deer and 
a cresent. It was encircled on all sides with golden bracelets, 
adorned with flags made of vaidurja and was like unto the 
flaming fire. And being thus well protected with Brahma 
weapons resembling the Sun in brilliance, the mighty 
son of Ravana became invincible. And offering oblations 
unto Fire in accordance with demonaic incantations and 
thus obtaining the power of hiding himself, that hero, ever 
victorious in battle, issued out of the city and said, — “Slay- 
ing these two brothers in battle, who have uselessly wandered 
away into the forest, shall I crown my father Ravana with 
victory. Destroying Rama and Lakshmana, and clearing 
the monkeys off the earth, shall I satisfy my sire greatly.” 



* Saccharum — a reed or grass, 
f Beleric myrobalan. 

X A ladle with a doable extremety or two oval collateral excavations made 
of wood to pour ghee upou the sacrificial Fire. — T. 

*74 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1386 



RAMA YANA . 



Saying this, he disappeared from their view. Thereupon 
that fearful foe of the lord of celestials appeared in the battle- 
field, excited with wrath, armed with bow and sharp 
N&rachas and commissioned thus by the Ten-necked one. 
He beheld there those two heroes discharging flaming arrows 
and surrounded by the monkeys like unto the fearful three- 
hooded serpent in the midst of other serpents. And thinking 
“these must be Kama and Lakshmana,” and stretching 
his bow he began showering arrows like unto clouds. He 
was seated in a car in the welkin and hidden from the human 
gaze and began to assail R&ma and Lakshmana with 
sharp shafts. And being hurt with the arrows, Rama and 
Lakshmana, fixing arrows on their bows, began to discharge, 
celestial shafts. And those two highly powerful heroes 
could not even touch his person with their arrows resembling 
the Sun albeit they covered the whole welkin therewith. 
And clouding the whole sky with smoke that effulgent one, 
enveloped in Trost, hid himself from their gaze. There 
was not audible the twang of his bow, the sound of the wheels, 
or the noise of the steeds. Nor was he «een by any. In 
that terrible darkness of clouds that one of mighty arms 
began to make a downpour of Narachas and arrows like 
hail storms. And in that encounter, Ravana's son, inflamed 
with ire ; wounded Rama, with shafts, resembling the Sun 
and obtained by him as a boon. And being hurt with 
Nar&chas, like unto mountains wet with rain, those two 
foremost of men, began to discharge shafts feathered in gold. 
And reaching the son of RSvana in the sky and soaked in 
blood those golden arrows, fell down on earth. And those 
two best of men, hurt with his arrows, became more efful- 
gent and baffled the shafts discharged by the Rakshasa. 
Thereupon Rama and Lakshmana began to aim their 
sharp shafts to the direction whence the arrows came down. 
And stationed in his chariot that mighty car-warrior 
disturbed all quarters with his arrows and pierced Da9aratha’s 



Digitized by 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



* 387 

sons with sharp shafts won by him. And being greatly hurt 
with those sharp-pointed and terrible arrows R&ma and Laksh- 
mana appeared like blossoming kingsukas . Like unto the 
sun hidden in clouds they could see neither his counte- 
nance and motion, nor his bow and arrows. And being 
wounded with those arrows hundreds of monkeys died 
and fell down on the earth. Thereupon Lakshmana, being 
excited with wrath, spoke unto his brother, saying — “To 
slay all the Rakshasas shall I discharge to-day Brahma 
weapon.” Thereupon Rama spoke unto Lakshmana, gifted 
with auspicious marks, saying — “It doth not behove thee to 
clear all the Rakshasas off the earth for the folly of one indivi- 
dual. Thou shouldst not slay him, who hath retired from battle, 
• hath hidden himself, hath sought thy shelter, hath stood 
before thee with joined palms, hath fled away or who is 
bewildered. O thou of mighty-arms, let us try to slay him 
(Indrajit). And to accomplish it I shall use the weapons 
gifted with great impetuosity and resembling the serpents. 
He is hidden from the public gaze so we must slay him — 
had he been fighting openly the leaders of the monkey hosts 
could have slain that RSkshasa. Truly he shall be burnt to 
death with my shafts and fall down on the earth albeit he 
entereth the regions under the earth or the abode of the 
celestials.” Having said these words pregnant with a high 
significance, the high-souled and heroic descendant of Raghu, 
being surrounded by monkeys, began to concert various 
plans for the destruction of that terrible Rakshasa of wicked 
deeds. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1388 



RAMA YANA. 



SECTION L X X Xl. 



JECaving read the intention of that high-souled RSghava, 
he retired from the battle-field and entered into the city of 
Lankt. And remembering the destruction of many a quick- 
paced Rakshasa, his eyes were rendered coppery with ire ; 
and that hero, the son of Ravana, issued out of the city again. 
And that highly powerful, Indrajit, a descendant of Pulasta 
and an enemy of the celestials, issued out, encircled by the 
Rakshasas, by the western gate. And beholding the heroic 
brothers Rama and Lakshmana prepared for fight, Indrajit 
spread illusions. And placing an illusory figure of Sita on 
the car, encircled by a huge army he began to make arrange- 
ments for her destruction. And desiring to charm all with 
his illusions, that one of wicked intent, preparing himself 
to slay Sita, proceeded towards the monkeys. And beholding 
him thus proceed, the monkeys, inflamed with ire, desirous 
of fighting and with crags in their hands, moved on, And 
preceded them all, Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, 
with a huge mountain-top in his hand. He beheld there, on 
lndrajit’s car, Sita, deprived of all joy, poorly, greatly reduced 
with fasts and wearing a single braid. And Raghava’s be- 
loved spouse wore a piece of soiled cloth, and though 
highly beautiful, the grace of her person was greatly 
spoiled with dirt. That daughter of Janaka, was not seen 
by him for a long time. And beholding her and deciding 
instantly that she is the daughter of Mithila, (he became 
greatly sorry). And seeing her on the car, innocent, poor, 
deprived of joy and brought under the influence of the son 
of the lord of Rakshasas that great monkey thought within 
himself — ‘What must be the intention of Indrajit ?* and 
accompanied by heroic monkeys advanced towards the son 
of Ravana. And beholding that monkey host, Ravana’s son 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1389 

became beside himself with ire and unsheathing his weapon 
Nistrinsha , caught her by the hair. And that RSkshasa 
addressed himself to strike her in the presence of all those 
monkeys, and that illusory figure of Sita began to bewail 
saying, “O R5ma ! O R§ma !” And seeing her thus caught by 
the head, Hanum£n, the son of Maruta, greatly sorry, began to 
shed tears. And beholding that beloved spouse of Rama, 
having a tender and beautiful person, he addressed angrily the 
son of the lord of Rakshasas with harsh words. “It is for thy 
destruction, O Vicious-souled one ! that thou hast touched 
her hair. Being descended from that great Brahmi. ascetic 
thou art born as a Rakshasa. O ! cursed art thou, since thou 
bast cherished such a desire and engaged in such a vicious 
deed. O vile I O wicked j O cruel and dishonorable wight f 
O thou having vice for thy prowess ! O shameless ! Art 
thou not ashamed of perpetrating such an inhuman deed. 
What hath Maithili done by thee, O cruel one ! that thou 
art ready to slay her — She hath been banished from 
her home, territory and hath been separated from her lord. 
O thou worthy of being slain, destroying Sita, thou shalt not 
live long as thou hast been brought under me. Thou shalt 
after the death reach the place which is occupied by those 
who murder women— a place which is avoided even by those 
who commit every sort of crime punishable by law.” Saying 
this Hanuman, accompanied by monkeys armed with weapons, 
and excited with ire, proceeded towards the son of the lord 
of Rakshasas. Beholding the highly powerful monkeys 
advance thus the Rakshasas, inflamed with wrath, obstructed 
them. And assailing the monkey-hosts with thousands of 
arrows, Indrajit spoke unto that foremost of monkeys, 
Hanuman, saying, — “To-day I shall slay before you all 
Vaidehi,for whom thou,Sugriva and R§ma have come. Slaying 
I her, O monkey, I shall afterwards' kill thee, Rama, 
Lakshmana and Sugriva and the dishonorable Bibhisana. 
And, O monkey, about not destroying women, of which thou 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1390 



RAMA YANA . 



wert speaking ( I might say ) that we must always da 
what pains our enemies.”* Saying this, Indrajit with a 
sharp sword, himself killed the illusory Sita thus bewailing. 
And being sundered by him obliquely in a way in which a 
sacred thread lies on one’s own person, the innocent (Sit5) 
having a beautiful countenance fell down on the earth. And 
slaying her Indrajit spoke unto Hanum&n, saying, — “Behold 
I have slain (before thee) with my sword Rama’s beloved. 
And Vaidehi being thus slain, all your labours have been 
rendered useless.” And destroying her with his own hand 
by means of a huge sword, Indrajit, greatly pleased ascended 
his car and began to emit dreadful roars. And the monkeys 
stationed near heard that terrible roar and saw him enter 
the castle. f And slaying Sita J that wicked-minded son of 
Ravana became greatly pleased. And beholding him thus 
delighted the monkeys being greatly sorry fled away. 



SECTION lx x x 1 1 • 



Hearing that dreadful uproar resembling the sound of 
Indra’s thunder bolt, the monkeys, casting their looks on 
all sides fled away. Thereupon Hanuman, the son of Maruta, 
spoke unto them, poorly, terrified and of a sorrowful counte- 
nance, saying, — “ O monkeys, why do ye look so melancholy 

* There is one sloka intervening according to some texts — but it has been 
omitted by many- The reasons for this omission are best known to them. 
The purport is : — “Why did R&ma slay T&rak& before P And I shall therefore 
slay his spouse the daughter of king Janaka.” Hearin Indrajit attempts 
to justify himself and wants to prove that R&ma is equally blameable for 
this. — T. 

f The castle built by Indrajit by means of his illusory power in the 
air. — T. 

X This refers to the figure of SitA made by illusion. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



1 39 1 

and why are yon flying away ? Why have ye renounced 
your earnest desire for fight? And where is your heroism 
gone ? Do ye remain behind me, I shall go first in the 
battle.” Being thus addressed by that highly intelligent son 
of the Wind-god, they were greatly excited with wrath and 
being pleased took up trees and crags in their hands. And 
roaring thus the leading monkeys advanced towards the 
Rakshasas and stood encircling Hanuman in the battle-field. 
And being surrounded on all sides by leading monkeys, 
Hanuman began to burn down enemy's host like unto fire 
spreading its flames. And being encircled by monkey-hosts 
that mighty monkey resembling Death himself began to 
grind the Rakshasas. And being overwhelmed with grief 
and wrought up with ire, that monkey Hanuman, threw a 
huge crag on the car of that son of Ravana. Beholding that 
crag about to fall down on the car, the charioteer moved 
his horses and it was speedily brought at some distance. 
And not reaching Indrajit stationed on the car and the 
charioteer, that crag, uselessly hurled, fell down on the earth. 
And that crag falling down many of the Rakshasas were 
crushed. Thereupon hundreds of huge-bodied monkeys, 
emitting cries and taking up crags and trees proceeded 
towards him (Indrajit) and hurled them at him. And the 
monkeys gifted with dreadful prowess began to make a down- 
pour of crags and trees. They thus assailed the enemies and 
frequently emitted cries. And the grim-visaged night- 
rangers were thus assailed with trees in that field by the 
terrible monkeys. Beholding his army thus distressed by 
the monkeys, Indrajit, excited with wrath, and taking up his 
dart, proceeded towards the enemies, and encircled by his 
soldiers showered terrible shafts upon them. And that one of 
dreadful prowess slew many a leading monkey by means of 
darts, Asanis, swords, pattigas and clubs. And the highly 
powerful monkeys destroyed his retinue, with crags, stones 
and trees having strong trunks. And Hanuman thus crushed 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1 39 2 



RAMA YANA . 



many a Rakshasa of terrible deeds. Obstructing the 
Rakshasas (for some time) HanumSLn spoke unto monkeys, 
saying, — “Stay, we should not fight now. That daughter 
of Janaka hath been slain, for whom we have engaged in 
fight, renouncing all hope of life and desiring to accomplish 
Kama’s satisfaction. Let us now go and inform R§ma and 
Sugriva of it. And we shall do as we shall be commanded 
by them. Saying this and desisting all the monkeys from 
encounter that foremost of monkeys proceeded undaunted 
and heroically. And beholding Hanuman proceed thus where 
Raghava was that wicked-minded one (Indrajit) with a view 
to -offer oblations unto Fire entered the sacrificial altar 
Nikumbhila. And reaching there Indrajit lighted up fire and 
began to pour oblations therein. And the Fire blazed up 
receiving oblations of blood, and being satisfied assumed the 
appearance of the setting sun. And Indrajit conversant 
with all ceremonials, offered oblations in due form for the 
welfare of the Rakshasas. And they all stood there watching 
the result and desirous of ascertaining the success of the 
battle* 



SECTION LXXXIII. 



H EARING the terrible war-cry of the Rakshasas and 
monkeys Raghava spoke unto Jambavan, saying ; — “O gentle 
one, forsooth hath Hanuman performed some mighty act— 
for I hear the dreadful sound of the weapons. Do thou 
therefore proceed speedily, O lord of bears, with all thy 
soldiers to assist that foremost of monkeys. 



* This sloka hath been left off in some editions.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUD DHAKA NJDAM. 



1395 

Thereupon, saying, ^So be it/ that king of bears, surround- 
ed by his forces, approached the Western gate, where the 
monkey, HatiumSLn, was stationed. And then the lord of 
bears saw Hanuman approach, surrounded by monkeys sighing 
hard, who had faught the fight. And seeing on the way 
that host of bears dreadful and resembling dark clouds, on 
the march, Hanum&n made them desist. And that illustrious 
one along with that force, speedily presented himself {before 
Rama), and with a heavy heart addressed him, saying,— 
4 ‘As we were fighting the field, Ravana’s son, Indrajit in our 
very sight slew Sita, crying (in distress). O subduer 
of enemies, seeing her (in this plight', I, with my senses 
bewildered, have been overwhelmed with grief. Therefore 
I have come unto thee to inform thee of what hath befallen/’ 
Hearing these words of his, Raghava, overwhelmed with grief, 
dropped down to the earth, like a tree whose roots have 
been severed. Seeing the god-like Raghava down on the 
earth, the foremost monkeys from all sides rushed forward 
and came to where (he was). And with water scented with 
lotuses,* they fell to sprinkling that one resembling a furious 
firef that hath suddenly arisen. Thereat Lakshmana, over- 
come with sorrow, embracing Rama, spoke unto him words 
fraught with reason and import, — <{ ProfitlessJ virtue is 
incapable, O noble one, of delivering from calamities thee, 
who hast subdued thy senses, and who ever abidest in the 
good path. Beings and the mobile as well as the immobile 
cannot have that direct perception of virtue which they have 
of happiness. Therefore, I ween, virtue is a non-entity. 
Inasmuch as the immobile (albeit devoid of any regard for 

* Padmotpalasugandhibhih — water scented with pad mas. — lotuses proper , 
and utpalas — blue lotuses — {Nymphea cerulea).—T. 

t ‘R&ma,’ remarks the commentator, ‘was a fire -lighted by his grief for 
Sitl»— T. 

t ‘Profitless,’ although apparently an epithet of virtue, is really the 

predicate of the sentence. ‘Virtue, incapable of delivering thee is 

profitless' — T. 

*75 



Digitized by t^ooQle 




*394 



RAMA ¥AivA. 



virtue) are nevertheless happy, and as the mobile also are 
so, this virtue cannot lead to happiness. (If it were 
so), one like thee would have not been placed in peril. If 
unrighteousness would bring unhappiness on creatures, 
R&vana should hence to hell, and thou possessed of virtue, 
shouldst not come by misfortune. And seeing that he is free 
from danger, and thou art in it, righteousness and its 
opposite are found to have tendencies the very reverse of 
those assigned to them respectively (by the Vedas)* And 
if by means of virtue, one attaineth the felicity attached to 
it, and by means of unrighteouness, one reapeth its 
proper fruit, then let those that are unrighteous reap the fruit 
of their impiety, — nor let those that set their face against sin, 
be deprived of the fruit of their righteousness ; and let those 
that walk in the way of virtue reap the fruit of their piety. 
But as prosperity attendeth those that are established in un- 
righteousness, and as those regardful of righteousness fare 
lamentably, — these* have not the senses assigned to them (by 
the scriptures). If, O RSghava, (it is contended that)unright- 
eousness cutteth off the wicked,then whom shall Unrighteous- 
ness, himself slain by the act of slaughter of the destroyer, — 
slay in his turn ? Or if it is said that one is slain or slayeth 
another by ordinance, then it is Destiny, which is touched by 
the sinful act and not he. O chastiser of foes, incapable of 
meting out retribution, t — unmanifest itself, and non-existent, 
how can virtue, even if we grant its existence, find out the 
person that should be slain ? If, O foremost of the good, it 
had existed, thou wouldst not have come by any misfortune. 
But inasmuch as thou hast fallen into this plight, there is no 
such thing as virtue. Or itself feeble and impotent, it taketh 
refuge in manliness. And being powerless and bereft of 
dignity, - it should, I deem, by no means be followed. And 
if virtue is a property of manliness, then carefully forsak- 
* Virtue and vice. 

t ‘In consequence,’ remarks Rctm&nuja, ‘of their being deviod of consciousness.' 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDA M. 



ms 



ing virtue, do thou follow strength as thou hast hitherto 
followed virtue. But, O subduer of enemies, if truthfulness 
be virtue, art thou not bound by that departing from 
which the king lost his life ?* And, O chastiser of foes, if 
virtue must be practised above all, or if prowess must have 
precedence, — then the thunder-handed Satakratu would not 
have celebrated his sacrifice, slaying the ascetic.f O 
R&ghava, virtue aided by prowess, destroyeth enemies. 
Therefore, O Kakutstha, people, for compassing their ends, 
resort to both virtue and prowess. This, sire, is my opinion : 
this, O RSghava, is virtue. But thou, having then 
renounced the kingdom, hast laid the axe at the root! of 
righteousness. Like streams issuing out mountains, all acts 
spring from wealth flowing from various regions and 
attaining magnitude. Like a shrunken stream in summer, 
all the acts of that foolish person who hath been divorced 
by wealth, are annihilated. — He that renouncing riches 
within his reach, § hankers after enjoyment, — being carried 
away by his overmastering desire, taketh to getting at wealth 
by sinful acts ; and then he incurreth guilt. Unto him that hath 
wealth are friends, unto him that hath wealth are acquaint- 
ances, — he that hath wealth is an individuality in this world, 
and he that hath wealth is a learned person. He that hath 
wealth is powerful ; he that hath wealth is intelligent ; he 
that hath wealth is mighty-armed ; and he that hath wealth 
is full of all graces. All these that I have cnnumerated are 
the evils of forsaking fortune. (I cannot divine) what made 
thee, renouncing the monarchy, to adopt such a course.— 

* Explains the commentator, — * King Da9aratha lost his life, because he 
did not observe his word of installing thee in the kingdom. Art thou not 
bound by his word as well ? ’ — T. 

f The Logic is all in a jumble ; but such is the text. The ascetic was 
Vi9warupa. The. meaning, according to the commentator, is that, prowess is 
first and virtue next. Indra first used force, and then acquired merit. — T. 

{ ‘Root’, remarks R&m&nuja, — ‘which is interest !’ 

$ The commentator would have 'gotten riches.* 



Digitized by 



Google 





RAMA YANA 



* 39 6 

He that hath riches, hath virtue and desire attending orr 
him, and hath everything auspicious. That one without 
wealth, that seeketh it, cannot secure the wealth of prowess, 
without riches and desire. And, O lord of men, cheerfulness, 
and desire, and pride, and piety, and anger, and self-restraint, 
and self-control — all these come from wealth. As the planets 
are not discovered on a stormy day, that wealth, the w r ant of 
which renders this world naught even unto the ascetics 
practising righteousness, — is not visible in thee. O hem, 
thou having abode by the words of thy superior and having 
come (to the forest), thy wife dearer then life itself hath been 
ravished by Rakshas. But, O hero, to-day, O R&ghava, by 
my acts will I renrjove this huge sorrow that hath been heaped 
upon us by Indrajit. Therefore, rise thou up. Rise up, O 
foremost of men, O long-armed one, O thou who observest 
vows. Why dost thou not understand thyself as the Supreme 
Soul ?* And, O sinless one, urged on behalf of thy welfare, 
I, waxing wroth on hearing of the slaughter of Janaka's 
daughter, shall with my shafts entirely raze to the ground 
Lanka with cars and elephants and steeds and the foremast 
Rakshas.” 



SECTION lx xxiv. 



AlS Lakshmana devoted to his broth er was comfort- 
ing Rama, Bibhishana, posting his forces at their 
proper quarters, came there, surrounded by four heroes 
accoutred in various arms, resembling masses of colly, 
rium or leaders of elephant-herds. And approaching 
the high-souled Raghava, overwhelmed with grief, he saw 

* R.lma is conceived as an incarnation of Vishnu.— T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 



YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



*397 



the monkeys with tears in their eyes. And he saw that joy 
of the Ikshw&ku race — the high-souled R&ghava — stupified 
with grief, lying on the lap of Lakshmana. And seeing 
Rama cast down and inflamed with grief, Bibhishana, inly 
pained, said, — ‘What is this?’ Thereat, gazing at Bibhishana 1 s 
countenance as well as all those monkeys, Lakshmana, with 
his eyes flooded with tears, said these words pregnant with 
dire import,— “O placid one, hearing from HanumSn's lips 
that Sit5 hath been slain by Indrajit.Righava hath been over- 
come with stupor.” As Sumitra’s son was speaking thus, 
Bibhishana, preventing him, addressed the stupified Rama in 
these pregnant words, — “O king, all that Hanumln in distress- 
ful guise had communicated unto thee I deem as improbable, 
like unto the drying of the deep. 1 know the intent of the 
impious Ravana with reference to Sita, O mighty-armed one. 
Her lie will not slay. I, seeking his welfare, had besought 
him much, saying, — ‘Let go Vaidehi’, — but he did not 
act up to my speech. Neither by conciliation, nor by 
gift, nor by dissension, — and where is war ? — nor by 
any other means is one capable of obtaining the very 
sight of SitS. Having bewildered the monkeys, the 
RSkshasa hath gone back ; and, O mighty-armed one, know 
her to be the illusory daughter of Janaka. To-day, going 
'to the sacrificial ground (called) Nikumbhiia, he will offer 
oblations into fire ; and there the deity of fire will present 
himself along with Vasava and the (other) divinities. And 
then Ravana’s son shall be invincible in battle. Indubitably 
that illusion hath been wrought by him, to deceive (the 
monkeys), so that they might not through their prowess 
disturb him there. Thither will we go before he hath 
furnished his (sacrifice). O foremost of men, shake off 
this vain sorrow that hath overcome thee! Seeing thee 
smitten with grief, this entire host is dispirited. Here, with 
thy heart composed, do thou stay, summoning thy strength. 
Send Lakshmana along with us and the flower of the forces. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1398 



RAMAYANA . 



This foremost of men by means of sharpened shafts will 
make Havana's son give up his rites ; and then shall he be 
capable of being slain by us. These keen and sharpened 
shafts of his,attaining access of velocity through the feathers 
of birds, and themselves resembling fierce fowls, will drink 
his* blood. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, do thou in 
order to the destruction of the R&kshasa, commission 
Lakshmana, even as the wielder of the thunder-bolt com- 
mandeth the same. And as to-day no time should be lost, 
therefore do thou send Lakshmana for campassing the 
destruction of the foe, even as Mahendra sendeth the thunder- 
bolt for bringing about the destruction of the enemies of 
the immortals. If that foremost of R&kshasas can finish his 
rites, he shall be invisible to both celestials and Asuras ; and, 
he fighting after finishing his sacrifice, the celestials them- 
selves shall be placed in great jeopardy.” 



SECTION L X X XV. 



Hearing his speach, R&ghava, overwhelmed with grief, 
could not perfectly comprehend what was said by the 
Rakshasa. Then, summoning up patience, Rama — captor of 
hostile capitals — spoke unto Bibhishana, seated near the 
monkeys, — “O lord of Nairitas, I once more wish to hear 
what, O Bibhishana, thou hast said.” Hearing Raghava's 
words, Bibhishana, skilled in speech, again spoke these words, 
saying, — “O mighty armed one, I have stationed the forces, 0 
hero, agreeably to thy directions. The entire force hath been 
divided around ; and the leaders have also been placed proper- 
ly. Further, 0 mighty master, listen to what I have to say. On 

* Indrajit’s. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



>399 ] 

thy having been causelessly aggrieved, we all of us were seized 
with grief. Jf this anxiety of thine conduceth to the joy of 
the enemy, do thou cast it off. And, 0 hero, bestir thyself, — 
and summon up spirits. If thou art to have Sit§, and if the 
night-rangers are to be slain by thee, do thou, O Raghu’s 
son, listen to my profitable speech. Let SumitrS’s son go 
forth, environed by a mighty force, for slaying in battle the 
son of RSvana, who hath gone to NikumbhiU ; with shafts 
resembling venomous serpents, discharged from the round* 
of his bow. By virtue of his austerities, that hero, from a 
boon conferred by the Self-sprung, hath obtained the 
Brahma9iras weapon, together with steeds coursing at their 
will. Now he with his army hath gone to NikumbhilS $ and 
when, having finished his rites, he gets up, know that all of 
us are slain. ‘When not reaching NikumblvilS, and not 
having finished thy offerings unto fire, thou, equipped with 
arms, art slain by a foe, — O enemy of Indra, that is thy 
death. 9 — Thus, O mighty-armed one, did the lord of all 
creatures confer a boon (on Indrajit), and, O king, thus was 
the death of this intelligent one ordained. O Rama, for 
compassing the destruction of Indrajit, do thou commission 
a mighty force. On his being slain, know’ that Havana along 
with his retainers are slain.” — Hearing Bibhishana 9 s words, 
R5ma said, — “O thou having truth for prowess, I know the 
illusion of that fierce one. Without doubt, he is skilled in 
the Brahma weapon, is potent in illusion and, is possessed of 
exceeding strength. In conflict, he depriveth of conscious- 
ness even the celestials with Varuna (at their head). And 
as that illustrious (one) goeth about in the welkin on his 
chariot, none, O hero, can perceive his course, like the course 

of the Sun when the sky is covered w r ith clouds.” And 
R&ghava, being well acquainted with the illusive energy of 

his wicked-minded foe, addressed the renowned Lakshmana, 



* The bow drawn to its full stretch, becomes circular.— T. 



Digitized by 





1400 



RAMA YANA . 



saying, — “Environed by the entire host of the lord of 
monkeys, — accompanied by the leaders, O Lakshmana, 
headed by Hanuman, — with Jambav&n— king of bears — and 
girt round by the forces, — do thou slay this son of the 
Rakshasa, possessed of the strength of illusion. And 
accompanied by his counsellors, this high-souled night-ranger 
shall follow at thy back, in this engagement with that one 
skilled in illusion.” Hearing Raghava’s words, Lakshmana 
endowed with dreadful prowess, with Bibhishana, — took up 
another excellent bow. And donning on his mail, and putting 
on his armour and his sword, and furnished with arrows, 
and a bow in his left hand, — Sumitra’s son, touching 
Rama’s feet, feeling elated, addressed Rama, saying, — 
‘‘To-day the shafts discharged from my bow, piercing 
Ravana’s son, shall fall into Lanka, even as swans drop into 
a tank. This very day shall my arrows, shot from my 
redoubtable bow-string, rive the body of that terrific one.” 
Having spoken thus, the effulgent Lakshmana, eager to slay 
Ravana’s son, went before his brother. And having saluted 
at the feet of his superior and went round him, Lakshmana 
set out for the sacrificial ground (named) Nikumbhila, 
protected by the son of Ravana. And accompanied by 
Bibhishana, that powerful son of the king— Lakshmana — after 
his brother had offered up prayers in his behalf, — set off ( 
with all speed. And surrounded by thousands of monkeys, 
Hanuman as well as Bibhishana together with his counsellors 
— speedily went in the wake of Lakshmana. And strongly 
encompassed by that mighty monkey-host, (Lakshmana) saw 
the forces of the bear-king stationed on the way. And 
having proceeded far, Sumitra’s son — enhancer of the delight 
of friends — from a distance discovered the forces of the 
R&kshasa-monarch, drawn up in battle-array. And that 
subduer of enemies — Raghu’s son — bearing his bow in his 
hand, coming upon him whose martial might lay in illusion, 
—stopped (there) for Conquering his foe agreeably to the 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHA K AND AM. 



1401 



ordinance* of Brahma. And accompanied by Bibhislnna, 
the heroic Angada, and the Wind-god’s offspring, the 
powerful son of the king dived into the forces of the foe, 
various, blazing with burnished arms, dense with standards; 
and thronging with mighty cars,t capable of striking terror 
(into the hearts of the spectators), instinct with immeasur- 
able energy, and resembling darkness. 



SECTION LX X X V l< 



W HEN things were in this condition, R&vana’s younger 
brother addressed Lakshmana in words fraught with evil to 
foes and conducing to the welfare (of his own party), 
saying, — “Do thou without delay bring on an engagement 
between this cloud-black Rakshasa army, which thou be- 
holdest, and the monkeys having rocks for their arms. O 
Lakshmana, do thou exert thyself to break through hisj 
mighty-army ; and when the ranks are broken, the son of 
the R£kshasa-lord shall be visible. And scattering among 
the foes shafts resembling Indra’s thunder-bolt, charge him 
while he hath not yet finished this ceremony. Slay; O hero, 
this wicked one, this son of Ravana, given to illusion, and 
of terrific feats, — the fear of all the worlds.” ✓ Hearing 
Bibhishana’s words, Lakshmana graced with auspicious 
marks began to shower arrows on the son of the Rakshasa- 
chief. And bears and monkeys, given to fighting excellently 
with trees, in a body rushed towards that army (of Rakshas) 

* The ordinance was that Indrajit should be slain while remaining outside 
NikumbhilA., his rites not yet finished.— T. 

f Mahdrathai ( ab .) may also mean with mighty car-warriors.— T. 
i Indrajit’s, that is. 

176 



Digitized by L^OOQie 





*40* 



RAMAYAJVA. 



drawn up there. And the R£k9hasas (on their part) burning 
to slaughter the monkey-forces, rushed in the encounter with 
sharpened shafts and . darts and towards . And there took 
place a tremendous onslaught of the monkeys and the 
R&kshasas. And LankS resounded all around with that mighty 
tumult ; and the sky was covered with weapons of various 
shapes, and whetted arrows and trees and dreadful upraised 
mountain-tops. And Rakshasas having frightful faces and 
arms, plying their arms among the foremost monkeys, began 
to spread terror (there). And in the same way the monkeys 
in the conflict fell to slaying and wounding the R&kshasas 
with trees and hill-tops. And great was the terror that was 
spread among the warring Rakshasas by the flower of the 
bears and monkeys, possessed of gigantic persons and 
endowed with prodigious strength. 

Hearing his own army hard beset by the enemies, and 
drooping, — the unconquerable one, ere yet he had finished 
his rites, rose up. And issuing from the gloom of the trees, 
Havana's son, fired with wrath, ascended his car, which had 
already been well yoked (with steeds). And accoutred in a 
dreadful bow and arrows, — that one resembling a mass of 
collyrium, having a red face and eyes, looked dreadful like the 
Reaper — Death. And soon as they saw him mounted on his 
car, that host of Rakslias possessed of dreadful impetuosity, 
eager to engage with Lakshmana, stood on their ground. At 
this time that subduer of enemies — HanumSn — resembling 
a mountain, uprooted a giant tree incapable of being handled. 
And in that encounter, the monkey, consuming (the forces) 
like the fire risen at Doomsday, made that army of Rakshasas 
insensible with innumerable trees. And finding the Wind- 
god’s son, HanumSn, suddenly spreading devastation among 
the Rakshasas by thousands, (they) showered (shafts) on 
him. And approaching on all sides that one resembling a 
hill, those bearing whetted darts attacked him with darts ; 
those bearing swords in their hands, with swords ; those 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDAM. 



1403 

bearing javelins in their hands, with javelins ; with pattijgas , 
those equipped with pattigas ; and with bludgeons, and 
maces and graceful kuntas\ and with hundreds of sataghnis x 
and iron clubs 5 and with terrific axes ; and with bhindipalas \ 
and with boxes like unto thunder-bolts ; and slaps resembl- 
ing the aqani . And fired with fury, he (on his part) spread 
a huge havoc among them. And Indrajit saw that foremost 
of monkeys,. resembling a hill, the offspring of the Wind- 
god — possessing himself in calmness, while destroying his 
foes. And thereat, he* addressed his charioteer, sayings 
<l Cro where the monkey is. Being disregarded by the 
R&kshasas, he makes havoc among us.” Thus accosted by 
him, the charioteer went where the Wind-god's offspring was, 
carrying the exceedingly invincible Indrajit seated on the 
car. And rushing forward, that irrepressible one— the 
R&kshasa — began to shower on the monkey's head arrows 
and swords and pattigas and scimitars and axes. And 
bearing all those dreadful arms, the Wind-god’s offspring, 
overcome with a mighty rage said, — "O wicked-minded son 
of Rivana, if thou art a hero, fight on. Combat with me with 
thy arms. If in the encounter, thou bearest my impetus, 
then,0 thou of perverse sense, thou indeed art the foremost of 
R&kshasas.” Then Bibhishana pointed out unto Lakshmana 
the son of Rivana, who with his bow upraised, was eager to 
slay Hanum&n. “This one that, mounted on his car, is eager 
to slay Hanum&n, is the son of R^vana that hath vanquished 
Visava himself (in battle). Do thou, O son of SumitrS, 
with peerless shafts capable of resisting enemies, — dreadful, 
and competent to finish the lives (of foes), — slay the son of 
Ravana.” Thus accosted by Bibhishana terrific unto foes, that 
high-souled one saw (Indrajit) of dreadful prowess, difficult to 
get at, and resembling a hill, — stationed on his car. 

* Indrajit. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1404 



RAMA YANA. 



SECTION lx x x V I 



Having spoken thus unto SumitrSL’s son, Bibhishana 
experienced delight, and taking (Lakshmana) bearing a bow 
in his hand, hurriedly went off. And proceeding some way 
and entering the mighty wood, Bibhishana pointed out unto 
Lakshmana the (place of) sacrifice. And the energetic brother 
of RSvana showed unto Lakshmana the Nyagrodha, dreadful 
to behold and resembling a mass of sable clouds. ‘‘Here 
offering presents unto the ghosts, the powerful son of Ravana 
afterwards engages in conflict. Then the RSkshasa becomes 
invisible to all beings ; and he slayeth his enemies in battle 
and fastens them with excellent shafts. Do thou, ere he 
hath passed beyond the Nyagrodha, with flaming arrows 
destroy the powerful son of Ravana along with his car and 
steeds and charioteer/’ Thereupon saying, — ‘So be it/ the 
exceedingly energetic son of Sumitra — that delight of his 
friends — took up his post there, stretching his variegated 
bow\ And Ravana's son Indrajit, endowed with strength, 
mailed, and armed with a sword, and furnished with a banner, 
was seen mounted on a fire-hued chariot. And the highly 
powerful Lakshmana addressed Pulastya's son, never know- 
ing defeat, sayings — “I challenge thee to the encounter. Do 
thou give me battle, exerting thy utmost.” Thus addressed, 
the exceedingly energetic and intelligent son of Ravana, 
seeing Bibhishana there, spoke unto him harshly, thus,^ 
•‘Born and bred in this (Rakshasa race), thou art the very 
brother of my father. Why, O Rakshasa, being my uncle, 
dost thou range thyself against thy son ? But neither 
kinship, nor emity, nor race, O wicked-minded one, nor 
co-birth, can, O destroyer of righteousness, avail to make thee 
discern thy duty. O thou of perverse understanding, thou 
art indeed to be pitied ; as thou art worthy of being 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUD DHAKA NDAM, 



1405 



reproached by the virtuous 5 since, renouncing thine own, 
thou hast espoused servitude under another. Neither by 
thy character nor yet thy understanding dost thou perceive 
the mighty difference that lieth between living with one’s 
own kindred, and taking refuge with the base. If one that 
is not our own, be furnished with every grace, and if one’s 
own be void of all merit, — one’s kindred, albeit unworthy, 
is preferable ; and he that is not ours, is even always such. 
He that, forsaking his own party, serveth that of another, is 
destroyed even by the latter, when his own party, is destroyed. 
O night-ranger, such is this thy relentlessness, that, O 
RSvana’s younger brother, thou being a kindred, art capable 
of displaying thy manliness (as no other person can do so).” 
Thus addressed by his brother’s son, Bibhishana answered,— 
“O Rakshasa, why dost thou speak as if in ignorance of my 
character ? O impious son of the Rakshasa-chief, do thou 
forego the roughness which thou assumest on behalf of my 
dignity * Albeit born in the race of Rakshas of cruel deeds, 
yet having regard to the first of principles pertaining to men, 
my character is not that of a RSkshasa. I do not take 
pleasure in the terrible ; nor do 1 revel in unrighteousness. 
But how can a brother, although differing from his brother 
in character, be renounced by the latter ?? One renouncing 
a person, lapsing from virtue and bent on sinful acts, 
attaineth happiness, even as one doth by shaking off a 
venomous snake from his hand. The wise have called that 
impious one given to stealing others’ goods and violating 
others’ wives, — as worthy of being forsaken, even like a 
house that is aflame. — Robbing others’ property, outraging 
the wives of others, and inspiring fear among friends, — these 
three vices lead to destruction. The dreadful slaughter of sages, 

* Or, on account of thy heroism. 

f Some read Vishama^ilana, Then the sense would be : ‘How else could 
a brother bearing a difference in character, renounce his brother ?’ meaning 
R&vana. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1406 



JRAMA YANA . 



rebellion against all the gods, overweening conceit, anger, 
long-continued enmity, and running amuck of counsel,— 
these sins are sapping the life and fortune of my brother; and 
they have hidden his virtues even as douds cover a mountain. 
It is on account of these vices that my brother, thy sire, 
hath been deserted by me. And this city of Lanka will 
not be, nor thou, nor thy father. Thou art proud, and haughty, 
and a boy, O Rakshasa. Thou art fettered by the noose 
of Fate. Do thou say unto me whatever thou likest. To-day 
thou hast addressed harshly me, who have fallen on evil 
days ; but, O worst of Rakshasas, thou canst not pass this 
Nyagcocjha. Having smitten the KSkutstha, thou canst not 
live. Fight with that man-god, Lakshmana, in encounter. 
Being slain, thou shalt serve the deities in the abode of 
Yama. Displaying thy own prowess, do thou spend all thy 
weapons and all thy shafts. But coming within the ken of 
Lakshmana's arrows, thou wilt not to-day go hence, living, 
with thy forces.” 



SECTION L X X X V 1 1 1 . 



Hearing Bibhishana’s words, the son of Havana, 
deprived of his senses by passion, spoke harshly, and rushed 
forward in wrath. And with upraised weapons and scimitars, 
he, resembling the Destroyer himself, was mounted on a 
mighty car yoked with black steeds, and ornamented (on all 
sides). And that one endowed with terrific strength up- 
raised a huge, gigantic, strong and powerful bow, and shafts 
capable of destroying foes. And that mighty bowman 
and slayer of foes— the powerful son of Rivana — adorned 
(with ornaments) and mounted on his chariot, saw him 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDAM. 



1407 



dight (with his own splendour). And fired with wrath, (Indrajit) 
addressed Sumitra’s son, who, mounted on Hanum&n’s 
back, like unto the risen sun in splendour — accompanied 
Bibhishana $ and he also addressed all those principal 
monkeys, saying, — “Do ye behold my prowess I To-day do 
ye in the conflict bear my arrowy shower shot from my bow, 
incapable of being approached, and resembling the down- 
pour in the sky. To-day my shafts discharged from my 
mighty bow shall mangle your limbs, even as fire burneth up 
a heap of cotton. To-day with your persons pierced with 
sharp shafts, with darts, and javelins, and rishtis and arrows, 
shall I despatch you all to the abode of Yama. Who shall 
stay before me, fleet-handed, creating an arrowy shower in 
the field, and roaring like unto clouds ? Formerly in a 
night-engagement, with my shafts resembling the thunder- 
bolt and vajrciy ye two along with your foremost adherents, 
were rendered insensible and laid down on the earth by 
me. But, perhaps, thou hast forgotten it. As thou hast 
presented thyself for battle before me, fired with wrath and 
resembling a venomous serpent, it is evident thou wilt go to 
the region of Yama.” Hearing the vaunt of the Rakshasa- 
chief, Raghu’s son, inflamed with rage, with an undaunted 
countenance, spoke unto Ravana's son,— “O R&kshasa, hard 
is the achievement of the task that thou hast mentioned. 
He that compasseth business by act is alone intelligent.— 
But thou, O wicked-minded one, incompetent as thou art to 
bring about thy end, attaining thy arduous aim by words 
only, deemest thyself as crowned with success. That thou 
hadst rendered thyself invisible in the field of conflict, was 
the work of a thief, — and not the way of a hero. Coming 
within the range of thy shafts, I stay here,— do thou display 
thy prowess. What dost thou say in words ?” Thus 
addressed, the mighty Indrajit — conquerer of enemies — stretch- 
ing his dreadful bow, showered sharpened shafts. And 
discharged by him, those exceedingly impetuous arrows, 



Digitized by C^ooQie 




1408 



RAMA YANA . 



resembling the venom of serpents, hitting Lakshmana, fell 
down like unto hissing snakes. And in that encounter, 
RSvana's son — Indrajit — possessed of eminent impetuosity, 
pierced Lakshmana, graced with auspicious marks, with 
vehement shafts. And pierced with those arrows and bathed 
in blood, the graceful Lakshmana appeared like a smokeless 
fire. And seeing his own feat, Indrajit, coming forward, and 
setting up a tremendous cry, said, — “O son of Sumitra, my 
feathered and sharp-edged shafts shot from my bow, capable 
of destroying life, will to-day finish thee up. To-day, O 
Lakshmana, swarms of jackals and hosts of hawks and 
vultures shall alight on thee lying lifeless, having been slain 
by me. This very day shall the exceedingly wicked Rama 
behold thee, who art the friend of Kshatriyas and devoted 
unto thy brother, — and who ever bearest thyself ignobly, — 
slain by me ; to-day see thee, O Sumitr^s son, slain by me, 
with thy armour fallen off thy person, thy bow broken, and 
thy head severed.” As Ravana’s son was speaking thus 
harshly, Lakshmana conversant with the import of words, 
replied in a reasonable speech, saying, — ‘‘Leave off thy 
strength of tongue, O thou of perverse sense, O Rakshasa, 
O thou of crooked ways ! Wherefore dost thou speak thus ? 
Bring all this to pass in worthy deed. Why, O Rakshasa, 
without doing (what thou sayest), dost thou simply say it ? 
Do the deed, — so that I may have regard for thy utterances. 
Mark ! without speaking anything harsh, without censuring 
thee in the least, without venting any brag, shall, I, 0 
cannibal, slay thee.” Saying this, Lakshmana drawing his bow 
to its full bent, hit at the Rakshasa’s chest five ndrachas — 
wondrous impetuous arrows. And those arrows resembling 
flaming serpents, with their velocity accelerated by the 
feathers (with which they were furnished), blazed on the 
Nairita’s breast like the rays of the Sun. And wounded with 
those shafts, Ravana’s son, fired with wrath, pierced 
Lakshmana with three arrows discharged (from his bow). 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM . 



1409 

And exceedingly dreadful was the encounter that took place 
between those leonine man and Rakshasa, each eager to 
conquer the other. And both p'owerful, and both endowed 
with strength and possessed of prowess, — and both exceed- 
ingly invincible $ and both having unparalleled might and 
energy, — those heroes faught like two planets in the welkin ; 
or like Bala and Vrita, irresistible in conflict ; and those 
high-souled ones faught like two lions. And showering 
countless shafts and displaying many maneuvers, that fore- 
most of men and that of Rakshasas, faught on cheerfully. 



SECTION LXXX1X. 



Then sighing like an enraged serpent, that chastiser of 
foes, Da9aratha , s son, setting shafts (on his bow-string) 
showered them on the Rakshasa-chief. And hearing the 
twang of his bow-string the lord of RSkshasas, with his 
countenance fallen, gazed at Lakshmana. And then Biblii- 
shana spoke unto Sumitra’s son as he was fighting, “I 
find ( inauspicious ) signs in Ravana’s son. Do there- 
fore hasten on, — broken he is, without doubt.” Then 
fixing arrows (on his bow) resembling venomous snakes, 
he let go those keen shafts, like unto serpents furnished with 
poison. And smit by Lakshmana with arrows having the 
touch of the levin, (Ind raj it) for a while was stupified and 
had his senses overwhelmed. And eying that hero — son 
unto Da^aratha — present in the encounter, (Indrajit) with 
his eyes crimsoned in choler, drew near Sumitra's son. And 
coming up to him (Lakshmana), he again addressed (that 
hero) in a harsh speech, saying, — “Dost thou not remember 
my prowess at that first encounter, when thou along with tliy 
177 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1410 



RAMA YANA. 



brother was bound up,— that now thou art discharging arms 
(at me) ? Forsooth ye two in mighty encounter, with shaft* 
resembling the thunder-bolt and vajra , by me were first 
laid down on the ground, deprived of your lives, along with 
your principal adherents. Either this hath escaped thy 
memory or I fancy, thou plainly wishest to go to the abode 
of Yama,— inasmuch as thou hast set thy heart on beating 
- me. If at the first encounter thou hast not witnessed my 
prowess, to-day shall I show it unto thee. Do thou now 
stay, summoning thy attention.” Seeing this, he pierced 
Lakshmana with seven shafts, and HanumSn with ten keen- 
edged excellent shafts. And then, fired with double fury, 
that powerful one pierced Bibhishana with an hundred 
arrows, powerfully discharged (from his weapons). Seeing 
this act of Indrajit, that foremost of men, Rlma's younger 
brother, Lakshmana, with an undaunted countenance r fired 
with wrath without minding the same, — and saying with a 
laugh, — ‘This is nothing*, — taking dreadful arrows, in the 
conflict, discharged them at the son of Ravana. “O night- 
rangers, heroes, coming to the field never discharge (such 
shafts as these). These arrows of thine are light and of 
slight strength, and they conduce to my comfort. Heroic 
warriors, eager for encounter, do not fight thus.” Speaking 
thus, (Lakshmana) accoutred with his bow showered vollies 
of shafts (on his adversary). And at his arrows (hitting), 
(Indarjit's) mighty golden mail fell off his person, and 
dropped to the platform of his car like a cluster of stars 
dropping from the welkin. And with his armour dropping 
off, that hero — Indrajit— was wounded with ndrachas % like 
the Sun at dawn. That hero — R&vana’s son— endowed 
with dreadful prowess, in that conflict, pierced Lakshmana 
with a thousand shafts. And thereat Lakshmana’s gorgeous 
and mighty mail was rent in pieces. And each rushing 
forward was engaged in dealing blows and harrying them. 
And sighing again and again, they faught furiously. And 



Digitized by 




YUDDffAKANJDAM. 



1411 



with their persons cut all over, and laved in blood, for a long 
while the heroes kept cleaving each other with sharpened 
shafts. And those high-souled ones versed in warfare, and 
endowed with terrific prowess exerted their utmost in secur- 
ing victory. And covered with vollies of shafts, with their 
armour and banners rent, they drew each other’s warm blood 
flowing like water from a fountain. And they discharged 
dreadful showers attended with tremendous sounds, like the 
sounds of black clouds at Dooms-day* pouring torrents 
in the sky. And a long time went by as they faught. Nor 
did they turn away from the encounter, or know fatigue. 
And those foremost of those acquainted with weapons 
repeatedly displayed their weapons ; and their long and 
short shafts enveloped, the welkin. And the skill that 
they displayed was perfect, and showed lightness, variety and 
grace ; and both man and the Rakshasa carried on fearful 
and terrible conflict. And the dreadful and tremendous roars 
of each were audible (at that place) ; and terrific like the 
levin, they made the hearts of hearers tremble (in terror). 
And as they faught with might and main, the sounds that 
they sent resembled the deep rumbling of clouds in the sky. 
And pierced with ndrackas knobbed with gold, those power- 
ful and illustrious (warriors) with their hearts set on 
celebrity, bled profusely. And in that engagement gold- 
knobbed shafts hitting each other’s person, pierced the same 
and covered with gore, entered the earth. And other shafts 
were resisted in the sky by sharpened weapons; and some 
were snapped, and thousands of their arrows were cleft 
(in the sky). And in that field, the vollies of their shafts 
were dreadful to behold like unto a heap of Kuya aflame in 
a sacrifice. And the wounded frames of those high-souled ones 
appeared beautiful like a leafless, flowering Kin^uka and 
SSlmali in a wood. And each eager to vanquish the other, 

* Kalamaghuyo (gen). The commentator says the word means (black 
clouds but 1 prefer tha sense given. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




141? 



RAMA&ANA . 



Indrajit and Lakshmana momentarily discharged tremendous 
and terrific showers (of arms). And Lakshmana smiting 
RSvana’s son, and Ravana's son smiting Lakshmana, — they 
did not experience any fatigue. And with net-works of 
arrows deeply entering their persons, those vehement and 
exceedingly powerful ones resembled mountains topped (with 
trees). And all their limbs, drenched in blood and covered 
with arrows, looked like a blazing fire. And a great while 
did they fight ; yet they neither turned away (from the fight), 
nor did they experience any exhaustion. Then to remove 
(Lakshmana* s) fatigue from fight, the high-souled Bibhishana, 
working the weal of Lakshmana staying in front of the field, 
came forward in the encounter and took up his post. 



section LXL. 



Seeing the man and the Rakshasa engaged in battle, with 
their whole soul, each eager to beat the other, — like unto 
elephants with the temporal juice trickling from their 
temples, — desirous of beholding their encounter, RSvana’s 
mighty and heroic brother, bearing an excellent bow, stood 
in front of the arena. And taking up his post, he stretched 
his great bow and shot terrific sharp-pointed shafts at the 
Rakshasas. And even like thunder-bolt cleaving mighty 
mountains, those shafts furnished with peacock’s plumes 
falling powerfully (upon the foe), rent the Rakshasas. And 
those foremost of Rakshasas, Bibhishana* s followers, also, 
in the encounter discharged darts and scimitars and pattigas 
at heroic Rakshasas. And surrounded by those Rakshasas, 
Bibhishana, then in the midst of his followers, appeared like 
an elephant in the midst of young ones. Then inciting the 



Digitized by 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1413 

monkeys, whose dear object was to slay Ravana, that one 
versed in time, the foremost of Rakshasas, spoke seasonably 
thus, — “This one that stayeth (in the field) is the sole and 
mighty support of the Rakshasa-chief ; and this is his remain- 
ing force. Why then do the monkey-chiefs remain inactive ? 
On this wicked Rakshasa being slain on the edge of battle, 
the remnant of his army, with the single exception of 
Havana, is destroyed. That hero — Prahasta — hath been slain, 
and Nikumbha possessed of wondrous strength, and 
Kumbhakarna, and Kumbha, and the night-ranger 
Dhumraksha, and Jamvumali, and MahSmSli, and Tikshna- 
vega and Hemaprabha, and Suptaghna, and Jajnakopa, and 
the Rakshasa Vajradanstra, Sankradi, and Vikata, and 
Arighna, and Tapana, and Manda, and Praghasa, and 
Prajangha, and Jangha, and Agniketu, and Durdharsha, and 
the powerful Ra^miketus and Viddujjibha, and Dwijibha, 
and the Rakshasa — Suryya9atru, and Akampana, and 
Supar^wa, and the Rakshasas— -Chakramali, and Kam- 
pana, and Satwavanta, and DevSataka and Narantaka. 
• — Havirig slain these many powerful Rakshasas endowed 
with excess of might, — having crossed the sea with your 
arms, do ye cross this foot print of a cow. This is the 
remaining force which you monkeys must conquer ; all those 
Rakshasas, that had come forward, elated with the pride of 
strength, have all been slain. It is not meet for me to slay 
the son of my brother, yet, casting off compassion will I for 
R&ma slay him.* Tears surcharge the eyes of me who 
seeketh to slay him. Let therefore Lakshmana administer 
him his quietus. Ye monkeys, do ye in a body (first) 
slaughter those that are beside him (Indraj it.) 0 Thus 

exhorted by that illustrious Rakshasa, the monkey-chiefs 
were exhilarated and began to flourish their tails. And 
then those mighty monkeys roared again and again, and 
sent up various shouts, even as peacocks cry on seeing 

* The text has ‘brother’s son.' 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





14*4 



RAMA YANA . 



clouds. And then J&mbavan surrounded by his own forces, 
assailed the R&kshasas with rocks and with their nails and 
teeth. Thereat Rakshasas.endowed with exceeding strength, 
equipped with various weapons reproaching the lord of 
bears, as he was engaged in smiting (the foe), — -and 
renouncing fear, with shafts and sharp axes and pattigas and 
yashtts, and tomaras, in the encounter assailed J&mbavln, 
who was engaged in beating the RSkshasa forces. And that 
conflict between the monkeys and the Rakshas, waxed 
furious, like unto the tumultuous encounter of the immortals 
and the Asuras fired with wrath. And the magnanimous 
HanumSn incapable of being approached growing wroth, — 
uprooting a mountain, and putting down Lakshmana from 
his back, began a great carnage among the R&kshasas by 
thousands. And fighting a furious fight with his uncle, the 
powerful Indrajit — slayer of hostile heroes— again rushed 
against Lakshmana. And then there took place an encounter 
between those heroes in the field, — Lakshmana and the 
Rikshasa — discharging vollies of shafts and smiting each 
other;. and those mighty and impetuous ones repeatedly 
covered each other with networks of arrows $ like unto the 
sun and the moon covered by clouds at the expiration of 
Summer. And on account of their light-handedness, neither 
discharge of arrows, nor the drawing of the bow ; nor the 
setting of the shaft on the bow-string ; nor the taking of the 
bow; nor the selection of shafts ; nor the clenching fast of 
their fists ; nor the hitting of aims, — could be perceived as 
they faught on* And in consequence of the sky being covered 
with networks of arrows all around, discharged powerfully 
from their bows, the forms (of objects) could not be 
discovered. And Lakshmana having at Ravana's son, and 
R&vana’s son having at Lakshmana, critical was the 
huggermugger that ensued* in the encounter between each 
other. And they both kept ceaselessly showering feathered 

* i. e. in consequence of all sides being covered with arrows, neither the 



Digitized by L^OOQie 





YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



1415 



and sharpened shafts, the firmament was engulphed with a 
deep darkness. Arid in consequence of countless keen 
arrows alighting in hundreds, ail sides and all the cardinal 
quarters were swarming with shafts. And all being over- 
spread with gloom, a mighty fright took possession (of 
creatures) when the Sun having ascended the setting-hill, 
and darkness environing all objects. And that day* mighty 
torrents of blood flowed in thousands of streams ; and fierce 
beasts of prey set up terrific yells (all around). And at that 
hour the wind did not blow, and fire did not blaze ; and the 
Maharshis said, — ‘Fair befell creatures/ And the Gandharvas 
along with the ChSranas grew exceedingly agitated. Then 
Sumitr5/s son pierced the four black steeds of the leonine 
R&kshasa,caparisoned in gold. And then he hit at (Indrajit’s) 
charioteer with another yellow and sharpened javelin 
splendid, furnished with feathers ; and resembling the 
thunder-bolt of the great Indra. And through his fleet 
handedness the graceful son of Raghu with the thunder-bolt 
of his shaft, resonant with the sound of his palm, separated 
the (charioteer’s head) from his trunk. And on his charioteer 
having been slain the exceedingly energetic son of 
Mandodari, himself began to perform the function of a 
charioteer, and took up his bow. And this in the encounter 
was wonderful to behold. And then as (Indrajit) was 
eagerly engaged in managing the steeds, (Lakshmana) pierced 
him with sharpened shafts $ and when (Indrajit) was eagerly 
wielding his bow,(Lakshmana) discharged shafts at his steeds. 
And on his steeds having been torn with shafts, SumitrSL’s — 
foremost of fleet-handed— in the encounter assailed (Indrajit) 
doubtlessly ranging the field. Seeing his charioteer slain 
in the contest, Havana’s son forewent his martial ardour, 
and was cast down. And seeing the RSkshasa with his 

Rakshas nor the monkeys could distinguish their several parties in the 
encounter, and the blows that each dealt were misdirected in consequence. — T. 

* Aiya to-day in the text. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



RAMA YANA . 



1416 

face fallen, the leaders of monkey-bands, were exceedingly 
delighted and rendered homage unto Lakshmana. And then 
those monkey-chiefs — Pram5thi, Rabhasa, Sarabha and 
GandamSLdana, not brooking (their foe) summoned their 
impetuosity. And suddenly springing up, those highly 
powerful monkeys endowed with terrific prowess descended 
upon those four best of steeds. And on those chargers being 
assailed by those monkeys resembling mountains, blood 
gushed out of their mouths. And then the steeds were 
smashed and sent to the ground. And having slain the 
steeds, and smitten the mighty car-warrior* again by a 
vehement bound, came to the side of Lakshmana. And 
springing do\yn from his car whose steeds had been slain, 
Havana's son, his charioteer having been pounded, charged 
the son of Sumitra with arrows. And then Lakshmana 
resembling the great Indra, on (Indrajit's) best of chargers 
having been despatched, in the encounter began to terribly 
rive with arrows discharged (his foe) footing on the earth and 
showering excellent sharpened shafts. 



SECTION LXLI. 



Having his steeds slain, the night-ranger — Indrajit. 
standing on the ground, waxing fiercely angered, flamejd up 
in energy. And armed with bows, they, desirous of slaying 
each other with shafts resembled an elephant and a bull in a 
forest, came out for securing victory in . encounter. And 

♦ Maharatham (ac) may also mean mighty car . By the way the samasa 
or junction called Tatpurusha is a frequent source of obscurity in Sanskrit, 
specially where the gender of the word without samdsa is the same with that 
of the thing signified by the samdsa , as in this case.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUD DHAKA HD AM. 



1417 



slaughtering on* another, the RSkshasas and the wood- 
rangers, rushing this way and that, did not (for a moment) 
leave their lords. Then RSvana’s son, gladdening all the 
Rakshasas, and himself feeling cheered, addressed them in 
words of praise, saying, — “All sides are entirely enveloped 
in this gloom, — so that, O foremost of Rakshasas, here we 
do not know who belongeth unto us and who not. — Do ye 
fight fearlessly for stupifying the monkeys ; and I too, 
mounted on a car, shall come hither into the conflict. Do ye 
so act that the high*souled rangers of the woods may 
not attack me as I enter the city.” Saying this, that 
slayer of foes — R&vana’s son, deceiving tlve wood-rangers, 
entered the city of Lank& for providing himself with a 
(fresh) car. And embellishing a chariot, graceful and 
-adorned with gold, furnished with pragas and swords and 
arrows, yoked with superb steeds, and driven by a charioteer, 
knowing horses and possessed of instructions (anent his 
art), — that victor in battle — the exceedingly energetic son of 
Ravana — ascended it. And that hero, Mandodari’s son, urged 
on by the force of the Finisher, went out of the city, 
surrounded by the foremost Rakshasas ; and drawn by fast- 
speeding steeds, he presented himself before Lakshmana 
along with Bibhishana. And seeing R&vana’s son seated on 
the car, the son of Sumitra and the exceedingly powerful 
monkeys and the Rakshasa — Bibhishana — were highly 
amazed at the lighthandedness of that intelligent one. And 
Rivana’s son, waxing furious, in that contest began to bring 
down monkeys by hundreds and by thousands. And that 
victor in battle — Rivana’s son — fired with wrath, summoning 
all his celerity, slaughtered monkeys, drawing his bow into 
a circle. And slaughtered by nardchas of terrific impetuo- 
sity, the monkeys saught the shelter of Sumitrfl’s son, like 
creatures seeking the refuge of their Lord. Then the sou of 
Raghu, flaming up in martial wrath, severed hib* bow, 

* Indrajit’s. 

*7* 



Digitized by LjOOQIC 




RAMA YANA. 



I4i3 

displaying his fleethandedness. Thereat, taking another bow, 
(Indrajit) hurriedly fastened the string to it. And this bow 
also did Lakshmana cut off by means of a brace of arrows. 
And when (Indrajit) had his bow severed, SumitrSL’s son 
pierced the son of R&vana with five shafts res(*mbling the 
venom of a poisonous serpent. And the shafts discharged 
from his* mighty bow, piercing hist person, dropped to the 
earth like unto powerful red serpents. And having his bow 
cut off, Ravana's son, vomitting blood by his mouth, took up 
a superior bow powerful to a degree and having a stout 
string. And then aiming at Lakshmana, he, summoning his 
utmost celerity, showered arrows, as sbowereth Purandara in 
the season of rain9. Thereat Lakshmana, subduer of 
enemies, retaining his calmness, resisted that powerful 
arrowy shower shot by Indrajit. And then that exceedingly 
energetic one, Raghu’s son, possessing himself in calmness, 
displayed (his prowess) unto the son of R$vana ; and this 
was wonderful (to behold). And then displaying his lightness 
in the use of weapons, Lakshmana, growing furious, pierced 
tke R&kshasas with three arrows each in that mighty 
encounter ; and the lord of Rakshasas struck him with 
showers of shafts. And pierced sore by that powerful 
enemy — slayer of foes— he incessantly sent innumerable ar- 
rows after Lakshmana. And ere they reached their destination, 
that slayer of hostile heroes severed them with whetted 
arrows ; and in the encounter that righteous one and 
foremost of car-warriors with a dart having bent joints, cut 
off the head of’ his charioteer mounted on the car. And 
deprived of their driver, there the steeds, retaining their 
calmness, began to go in rounds, — and this was wonderful. 
Then SumitrS’s son of 9teady prowess, fired with anger, in 
that contest, frightening all, pierced his horses with arrows. 
And not brooking that act (of his adversary), RSvana’s son 

* Lakshmana’s. 

f Indrajit’a 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



i 




YUDD HA K A NBA M. 



1419 



in the encounter pierced with ten shafts Sumitr^s son capable 
of making people’s down stand on end. And his shafts resembl- 
ing thunderbolts, and like unto all varieties of venom, touch- 
ing (Lakshmana’s) mail having a golden splendour, were 
reduced to naught. Thereat considering Lakshmana as clad 
in an impenetrable armour, R&vana’s son — Indrajit — growing 
furiously enraged, displaying his lighthandedness - in arms, 
pierced Lakshmana in the temples with three well-knobbed 
shafts. And with those arrows lodged in his temples, 
Raghu’s son, delighting in battle, appeared beautiful in the 
field like a mountain furnished with three summits. Albeit 
thus smitten in the contest by the Raksha with shafts, 
Lakshmana swiftly smote him in turn with five arrows ; and 
in the encounter Lakshmana drawing his bow, pierced with 
shafts Indrajit’s face graced with elegant ear-rings. And 
those heroes — Lakshmana and Indrajit — equipped with 
exceedingly powerful bows, and endowed with heroism amt 
dreadful prowess, wounded each other with sharp arrows. 
And both Lakshmana and Indrajit, with their persons bathed 
in blood in that encounter, appeared like unto flowering 
Kinyukas. And approaching each other, those bowmen, each 
setting his heart on victory, wounded each other all over the 
body with terrific shafts. Then RSLvana’s son, carried away 
by martial rage, pierced Bibhishana in his handsome face 
with three arrows. And piercing the lord of Rakshasas, 
Bibhishana, he with three iron-headed arrows, pierced the 
monkey-leaders each with a shaft. Thereat, enraged at 
him more furiously, than ever, the exceedingly energetic 
Bibhishana with his mace despatched the steeds of the 
wicked-minded son of Ravana. Then jumping down from 
his chariot with its horses slain, (Indrajit), endowed with 
great energy, who had his charioteer pounded, discharged a 
dart at his uncle. And seeing it descend, the enhancer of 
Sumitra’s joy severed the same with whetted arrows, and 
brought it down in ten fragments to the ground. And. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 







RAMA YANA. 



Bibhishana of a tough bow, growing enraged, discharged 
at (Indrajit), who had his steeds slain, five speeding shafts 
having the touch of the thunder-bolt. — And those arrows 
furnished with gold at the feathered parts, riving his person, 
were bathed in blood, and resembled mighty red serpents. 
Thereat wroth with his uncle, Indrajit took up an excellent 
shaft — bestowed on him by Yama himself — endowed with 
terrific force, — the Sower of shafts among all the Rakshas. 
And seeing that mighty shaft; set by him (on the bow- 
string), the highly powerful Lnkshmana, possessed of 
dreadful prowess, (in his turn) took up another arrow, 
bestowed by Kuvera himself of immeasurable soul in a 
dream, — unconquerable, and incapable of being borne even 
by the celestials and Asuras with Indra at their head. And 
on their best of bows being powerfully drawn with their 
arms resembling bludgeons, they set up cries like unto 
Kraunchas. And on those foremost of shafts set on those 
excellent bows of those heroes, being drawn, flamed up|in 
exceeding splendour. And those flaming arrows, discharged 
from the bows, illumining the welkin, with vehemence struck 
at each other’s head. And a concussion took place of those 
arrows of terrific aspects ; and a furious fire sprang up 
thereat, with embers shooting around. And dashing against 
each other like unto mighty planets, they, reduced to an 
hundred shivers in the encounter, saught the earth. Seeing 
their shafts baffled, Indrajit and Lakshmana, staying 
on the edge of the battle, were seized with shame and wrath. 
Thereat Sumitr5’s son, flying into a fury, took up a VSruna 
weapon. And the conquerer of the great Indra intent on 
battle, in the encounter discharged a terrific Riudra weapon ; 
and the exceedingly wonderful Varuna weapon was baffled 
by him. Then, waxing wroth, that victor in battle— the 
wondrous energetic Indrajit— a$ if annihilating the world, 
discharged a Aiming Agneya weapon. And the heroic 
Lakshmana resisted it with a Solar weapon. Seeing his 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHA KANDA M. 



1421 



weapon resisted, R&vana’s son, transported with passion, took 
up an Asura arrow, capable of rending foes. And from that 
weapon issued daggers and clubs and darts and bhugundis 
and maces and swords and axes.* And in the conflict, 
seeing that dire and dreadful weapon, irrisistible to all 
creatures and capable of riving all arms, the effulgent 
Lakshmana baffled it with a Mahegwaraf weapon. And the 
encounter that took place between them was wonderful and 
capable of making people’s down stand on end. And beings 
stationed in the sky surrounded Lakshmana on all sides. And 
in that terrific encounter of the monkeys and the Rakshasas 
resounding with dreadful roars, the welkin was covered 
with innumerable beings seized with wonderment. And 
saints and Pitris and deities and Gandharbas and birds and 
serpents, placing Satakratu in their front, protected Laksh- 
mana in the conflict. And then that hero, Raghava’s younger 
brother, fixed (on his bow) another superior shaft, having 
the feel of fire itself, and capable of riving the son of Rivana ; 
furnished with fair feathers $ tapering ; having elegant joints ; 
symmetrical ; and plated with gold, — an arrow capable of 
finishing the body ; irrisistible ; dreadful ; terrific unto 
RSkshasas ; resembling the venom of poisonous serpents ; and 
worshipped by the celestial hosts 5 by which the exceedingly 
energetic and wonderful Lord riding the horsej — Sakra— 
of old in the war between the celestials and the Asuras had 
defeated the Danavas. And Sumitra’s son, Lakshmana.graced 
with auspiciousness, drawing on his be&t of bows that 
foremost of shafts — the Aindra weapon — invincible in conflict, 
spoke these words, tending to bring about his success, §— 

* This arrow resembled somewhat the bomb-shells in modern European 
warfare. — T. 

f i.e. belonging to Mahe9wara or Siva. 

i The celestial steed, Ucl?chai9rav&, sprung from the ocean on the 
occasion of the churning of the deep. — T. 

$ Words addressed to the deity presiding over the weapon. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




14*2 



RAMA YANA. 



“If Da9aratha’s son — Rima — is righteous and truthful, and 
if in prowess he hath no rival, then slay this son of Havana.” 
Saying this, the heroic Lakshmana in that conflict, drawing 
the straight-speeding arrow up to hisi ear,* discharged it at 
Indrajit. And shooting the Aindra weapon, that destroyer of 
hostile heroes — Lakshmana —severing from its trunk the head 
of Indrajit with its corslet, graced with burning ear-rings, 
brought it down to the ground. And the mighty severed 
head of the Rikshasa's son, resembling one made of gold, 
was seen covered with blood. And slain, Havana's sou 
dropped to the earth, with his armour and corslet on, and his 
bow fallen (from his grasp). And then all the monkeys with 
Bibhishana set up cheers, even as the immortals cheered 
at the destruction of Vritra. And in the sky there arose the 
victorious shouts of all beings and high souled saints, and 
also of Gandharbas and Apsar&s., And knowing (Indrajit) 
fallen (in fight), the mighty army of RSkshasas, attacked by 
monkeys burning for victory, fled in the ten cardinal 
directions. And assailed by the monkeys, the Rakshasas, 
pursued (by their foes), with their senses lost, rushed towards 
Lank5, leaving their arms behind. And overwhelmed with 
fright, Rakshasas fled in an hundred directions, all renounc- 
ing their arms — bearded darts, and swords, and axes. And 
harassed by the monkeys, some hurriedly entered Lank&, 
and some plunged into the sea, and some saught shelter in 
the mountains. And seeing Indrajit slain and lying down on 
the field of battle, thousands of Rakshasas fled away. As 
when the Sun sets, his rays remain no longer, on that 
Rakshasa having fallen, the Rakshasas dispersed in the ten 
cardinal quarters, like unto the Sun when his rays have been 
rendered mild, or fire which hath been extinguished. And 
the mighty-armed (Indrajit) was utterly reft of life. And 
on the son of the R£?kshasa-chief falling, the world, having 
its foe slain, with its huge affliction gone off, experienced 

♦ i.e, drawing the bow to its utmost stretch. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDmKANDAM. 



*4*1 

the height of joy. And on that unrighteous RSkshasa 
having been slain, the reverend Sakra together with the 
Maharshis was filled with delight. And sounds of kettle- 
drums were heard in the sky proceeding from the celestials. 
And blossoms were showered by dancing ApsarSs and 
liigh-souled Gandharbas. And this was wonderful (to behold.) 
And on that R&kshasa of fell deeds having been slain, the 
dust was laid, the water became transparent, the sky looked 
bright, and the deities and DSnavas were filled with 
rejoicings. And on that Dread of all creatures having been 
slain, the gods, Gandharbas and DSnavas, assembled together 
in joy, said, — “Now let the Brahmanas who have their sins 
removed, with their anxiety gone off, range about." 
And then the monkey-leaders, seeing that foremost of 
Nairitas of unparalleled prowess slain in battle, began to 
gladly pay homage (unto Lakshmana). And Bi,bhishana and 
HanumSn and jSmbav5n — leader of hears — saluted and 
hymned Lakshmana on the score of his victory. And 
shouting and bounding and roaring, the monkeys at this 
hour of high joy stood surrounding Raghu’s son.* And 
flourishing their tails and striking the earth (with them), the 
monkeys shouted, — ‘Victory unto Lakshmana \ 9 And embrac- 
ing each other, the monkeys with delighted spirits began to 
converse in various ways touching RSghava’s welfare. And 
beholding that deed, difficult of being done, performed by 
their beloved friend — Lakshmana — and hearing their foe — 
Indrnjit — slain (in battle), the celestials attained the summit 
of joy. 

* Descendant, that is. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





RAMA YAM 



* 4*4 



SECTION LXLII. 



Having in t!ie conflict slain that conquerer of enemies, 
Lakshmana graced with auspicious marks, with his body 
bathed in blood, experienced delight. And then supporting 
himself on Bibhishana and Hanuman, the exceedingly 
powerful Lakshmana endowed wdth prowess, taking 
JambavSln, Hanuman and ail the monkeys with him, speedily 
w r ent to the place where Sugriva and RSghava w r ere. And 
then going round RSma and saluted him, SumitrS’s son 
stood before his brother, like Indra’s brother staying before 
Sakra. And approaching with a look which of itself was 
significant* the heroic Bibhishana described unto the high- 
souled RSghava the dreadful destruction of Indrajit. And 
then the delighted Bibhishana related unto R5ma how 
the high-souled Lakshmana had cut off the head of R&vana's 
son. And as soon as that exceedingly powerful one heard 
of the destruction of Indrajit by Lakshmana, he experienced 
a huge accession of joy, and thus delivered himself, — 
“Excellent, O Lakshmana ! Pleased am I (with thee). Thou, 
hast performed a difficult feat. The son of R&vana having 
been slain, know for certain that we have been victorious.” 
And then smelling the head of the bashful Lakshmana, 
enhancer of fame, (RSma) endowed with prowess, from 
affection forcibly hugged him into his lap. And making him 
seat on his lap, and overpowering him with embraces, t 
(Rama) again and again tenderly eyed his brother, Lakshmana. 
And moved with grief, that best of persons, R5ma, smelling 
the head of Lakshmana, wounded with darts and having 
his person pierced (with arms), sighing and breathing hard — 

* i. e. of the destruction of Indrajit. 

t Avapiritam — ( ac ) pained. R&m&nuya says this epithet refers to 
Lalcshmana's having been wounded in the encounter. I differ from him. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





yvddbarandam. 



1425 



nursing liis body with his hand, addressed Lakshmana, 
soothing him, — ‘‘To-day his son having been slain, I deem 
Havana himself as slain in fight. On that wicked-minded 
■enemy of mine having been destroyed, I am victorious (in 
encounter). By luck, 0 hero, hast thou in conflict severed the 
right arm of the fell Ravana. Verily he (Indraj it) was his stay. 
Both Bibhishana and Hanuman have done mighty deeds in 
battle. In three days and nights, (my enemy) hath been 
brought down. To-day have I been made foeless. Now 
R£vana will for certain march foith, — backed by a mighty 
phalanx. R&vana will for certain sally out, hearing his son 
brought down. That unconquerable lord of R&kshasas, 
aggrieved for the destruction of his son, inarching out, — 
shall I slay, environed with a mighty force. O Lakshmatia, 
the conqueror of Sakra having in battle been slain by thee — 
who art my lord — Siti and the (entire) earth are not 
incapable of being obtained by me/’ Having thus soothed 
arid embraced his brother, Raghu’s son — Rama — highly 
rejoiced, calling Sushena, said, — “Do thou so act that this 
highly wise son of Sumitrfc, devoted to his friends, may be 
healed and be eased. Do thou without delay heal SumitriL’s 
sop, attached to his friends, of his wounds. And do thou also 
carefully relieve all those heroes in the army of bears 
and monkeys fighting with trees, — as well as others, who 
have been wounded and have got sores (in consequence).” 
Thus addressed by R&tna, the high-souled monkey-leader 
administered a potent medicine to the nose of Lakshmana. 
And smelling the same, he got healed ; lie was relieved of 
his pain and his outgoing vitality was shut up. And at the 
mandate of Raghava lie likewise treated his friends headed 
by Bibhishana and all the principal monkeys. And res- 
tored to his natural condition, Sumitr&'s son, healed, and 
with his exhaustion removed, and his suffering gone off in a 
moment, experienced exhilaration of spirits. And R&ma and 
the monkey-king and Bibhishana and the powerful lord of 

179 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1426 



RAMA YANA . 



bears along with their hosts, seeing Sumitra’s son risen 
hale, rejoiced greatly in delight. And the high-souled sou 
of Da9aratha honored exceedingly that exceedingly hard feat 
of Lakshamana \ and the monkey-king, hearing that the 
conquerer of Sakra had fallen in fight, was filled with joy. 



SECTION LXLIII. 



_£hen the counsellors of Pulastya’s son, hearing of 
Indrajit having been slain, speedily conveyed the tidings 
unto the Ten-necked one, who was ignorant* of the same. 
“O mighty monarch, in our very sight thy exceedingly 
effulgent son hath been slain by Lakshmana with the help of 
Bibhishana. And that hero confronted by the (other) hero, 
hath been vanquished in fight. And the hero, thy son, the 
conquerer of the celestial chief, hath also been slain by 
Lakshmana. And having gratified Lakshmana with his 
shafts, he hath repaired to the supreme regions. ,, Hearing 
of that mighty terror, viz., the rueful and dreadful 
destruction of his son, Indrajit, in battle, he straightway 
swooned away. Then regaining his consciousness after a 
long while, that foremost of RSkshasas — the king — over- 
whelmed with grief for his son, and distressed, burst into 
lamentations, with his senses wildered, — thus, — “O foremost 
in the Rakshasa army ! O my child endowed with high 
might ! Having conquered Indra himself, wherefore to-day 
hast thou come under the sway of Lakshmana ? Doubtless, 
thou enraged could pierce with thy arrows the Destroyer of 
Time himself, and the summit of Mandira, — whaA shall I s*y 

* Avajudya. R&mAnuya says it means “ignorant of the same.” Tirtha 
says it means, ‘Seeing.’ Then the sense would be, ‘the counsellors, having 
first seen Indrajit slain, informed R&vana of it.’ — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



1427 



of Lakshmana in encounter ? To-day king Viwa^wata' hath 
raised himself immensely in my estimation, for to-day he, 
O mighty-armed one, hath brought thee under the law of 
Time. But this is the way of capable warriors as 
well as celestials. He that layeth down his life for his 
lord, repaireth to heaven. To-day seeing Indrajit slain, 
the deities and the guardians of the worlds, and the 
mighty saints, their fear gone off, shall sleep peacefully. 
This triple world and this entire earth with her woods, 
reft of one — Indrajit — appear to me as vacant. To-day 
shall I hear the cries of the daughters of the Nairitas 
in my inner apartment, like unto the roars of she-elephants 
in a mountain-cavern. Renouncing thy state of ah heir- 
apparent, and Lanki and the Rakshas, O subduer of enemies, 
and thy mother, and me, and thy wife — whither hast thou 
gone, (leaving) us all ? O hero, I having gone to the region 
of Yama, thou ought to have performed my last rites, but 
thou standest in a relation the very reverse of this.* And 
Sugriva living and Lakshmana and Raghava, without extract- 
ing my dart, whither hast thou gone, leaving us all ? ' And 
then arising from the disaster that had befallen his son, a 
mighty wrath overcame the lord of Rakshasas — R&vana, as 
he was thus indulging in lamentations. And even as in 
summer, the (Solar) rays flame up the Sun, the destruction 
of his son flamed up all the fiercer, him, who was naturally 
irascible. And as he kept yawning in passion, a flaming 
fire with smoke darted from his mouth, even as it did from 
the mouth of Vritra. And burning in grief for the destruction 
of his son, and coming under masterdom of passion, that 
hero — R&vana— reflecting (awhile) in his mind, resolved upon 
slaying Vaidehi. And naturally red, and reddened (still 
more by the fire of wrath, Ravana's glowing eyes were 
dreadful (to behold). And his form, terrific by nature, in 

* i.e. I have to perform thy last rites, thou having fallen in fight while I 
am alive. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



RAMA YANA. 



1 4 *S 

consequence of the fire of his wrath havi ng possessed ft 
entirely, resembled the form of the enraged Rudra. And 
from the eyes of that infuriated one fell drops of tears as 
drop from a flaming lamp drops of burning oil. And as he 
grinded hi9 teeth, the gnashing resembled the sounds sent by 
the machine* drawn by the DSnavas and churning the deep. 
The R&kshasa9 durst not approach that one eying round 
and resembling the Destroyer himself, intent on devouring 
both mobile and immobile. Then exceedingly enraged, 
RILvana — lord of Rakshasas— spoke in the midst of the 
Rakshasas, inciting them to battle, — “I practised severe 
austerities for thousands of years ; and gratified the Self- 
sprung at times. Neither from Asuras nor from celestials 
can any fear spring to me. My mail conferred on me by 
Brahma, which in effulgence resembles the Sun himself, was 
hot broken by blows like unto thunder bolt at the war 
between the deitirs and demons. To-day who will come 
forward against me in battle accoutred in that and mounted 
on a car in the conflict ? Not even Purandara himself. Do 
ye, beating hundreds of drums, to-day raise that mighty and 
dreadful bow of mine which, with arrows, had been bestowed 
on one by the gratified Self-sprung at the war of the gods 
and Asuras,— so that 1 may therewith compass the destruc- 
tion of Rama and Lakshmana in mighty battle.” Burning 
(in grief) for the destruction of his son, the fell R&vana, 
coming under the influence of anger, reflecting (in his mind), 
resolved to slay Sita. And eying round, that copper-eyed 
and dreadful one of a terrific aspect, distressed, in a piteous 
voice addressed all the night-rangers, saying,— **By his 
power of illusion, <ny beloved child, for deceiving the wood- 
rangers, slaying something (else), had shown it unto them 

as Sha. Now will I do that good office myself, 

Vaidehi will I slay— even her that is devoted to that friend 
of Kshatriyns.” Having spoken thus untq his counsellor?, 
* Meaning the mountain Mand&ra. 



Digitized by LiOOQle 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1429 



he swiftly took np a sword; and raising it, of excellent 
temper and of cerulean hue, lie rushed out vehemently, 
surrounded by his wives and counsellors. From grief for his 
son, RSvana with his consciousness wildered, taking up a 
sword, in rage, rushed towards the place where Mithil&’s 
daughter was. Seeing the RSkshasa rising on, some, 
emitted leonine roars, and seeing the R^kshasa enraged, 
embracing each other, said,— “To-day those two brothers, 
seeing* this one, wilt be exceedingly pained. By this one, 
influenced with passion were the four guardians of the 
worlds conquered ; and many other foes were brought down 
in battle. Procuring gems from the three worlds, Ravana 
enjoyeth them. Neither in strength nor in prowess is there 
any one on earth who is his compeer.” As they were 
speaking thus, RJtvana, reft of his senses- by wrath, rushed | 
against Vaidehi, who had taken up her abode in the A^oka 
wood. And dissuaded by his friends endowed with good in- 
telligence, he, wrought up with high wrath, darted (against Sita), 
even as an enraged planet* rusheth against Rohinif in the 
firmament. And the blameless daughter of Mithila protected / 
by the RSkshasis, saw the infuriated Ravana bearing that best 
of blades in his hand. Seeing (Ravana) approach, sword in 
hand, despite the earnest entreaties of his friends, Janaka's 
daughter, Sita, pained and overcome by grief, said, weeping, 
—“From the way in which, wrought up with wrath, this 
wicked-minded one is rushing on at me personally, it appears 
that he will slay me, who have a lord, as one who hath not. 

He did urge me much ever devoted to my lord, saying ‘Be 
thou my wife but forsooth I disregarded him. And plainly 
in consequence of my refusal, he hath given way to despair. 
And overcome by anger and passion, he is ready to slay me. 

Or it may be that to-day for me those foremost of men, the 
brothers — Rama and Lakshmana — have been slain in 
encounter by this inglorious one. 1 heard a furious and 

* Kuja, etc . t H es peru s. 



Digitized- by v^ooQie 




M30 



RAMA YANA . 



»' 

fearful uproar raised by countless R&kshasas rejoicing, 
and expressing their delight. — Alas J O fie J For me those 
princes have met with destruction. Or it may be that not 
without slaying R&ma and Lakshmana, this terrific 
R&kshasa. having his heart set on sin, from grief for his son, 
will slay me. Fool that I am, I did not then act agreeably 
to Hanum&n’s words. If I had gone away seated on his 
back, without waiting for the victory ( of my lord ), I 
devoted to him, placed on his lap, should not have come by 
this repentance. When KaugalvS, having an only son, will 
hear of her son slain in battle, I fancy, her heart shall burst. 
And, weeping, she will remember that high-souled one’s birth 
and boyhood, and youth and pious acts and loveliness. And 
that one bereft of her consciousness, filled with despair, after 
having performed his sraddha ,* will doubtless enter into 
fire or water. Shame on the unchaste and hump-backed 
MantharS, having her heart fixed in sin, for whose sake this 
grief shall exercise Kaugaly£ !” Seeing the distressed 
^ daughter of Mithil£ lament thus, like unto Rohini come 
\ under the sway of a planet in the absence of the Moon, in 
the meanwhile hist pure and good courtier, named Supar^wa, 
endowed with intelligence, albeit prevented by other 
courtiers, spoke unto Ravana, foremost of RSikshasas,— 
“Wherefore, O Ten-necked one, O thou who art the very 
younger brother of Va^ravana himself, Dost thou desire 
to slay Vaidehi, forsaking righteousness ? Why, O hero ! 
O lord of Rikshasas ! having led the Brahmacharyya mode 
of life, studied the Vedas, and returned from the house of 
thy spiritual guide, and ever engaged in religious acts, to-day 
dost thou intend to slay a woman ? Do thou, O king, now 
stay expecting Mithila’s daughterj endowed with loveliness ; 

* Funereal rites performed in accordance with the injunctions of the 
Hindu Scriptures. — T. 

t R&vana’s. 1 

t Explains the commentator : “till thou slayest RAma in battle T. 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



M3 1 



and do thou along with us. vent thy wrath on him.* To-day 
being the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, do thou tins 
very day prepare for conflict ; at amdvasya, + environed with 
thy forces, do thou march for victory. Heroic, and intelli- 
gent, a mighty car-warrior and swordsman, thou, mounted on 
a car, slaying the redoubtable son of Da^aratha, wilt obtain 
Mithil&’s daughter." Thus exhorted by his friend, the 
unrighteous Rivana accepted his virtuous speech ; and then 
that powerful one went (back) to his house, and, surrounded 
by bis friends, entered the court. 



SECTION lx li v . 



Entering his court, the king, distressed, and exceed- 
ingly aggrieved, sat him down on the foremost seat sighing 
like an enraged lion. And stricken with grief in consequence 
of his son’s death, that highly powerful Havana, with folded 
hands, addressed all the heroic R£kshasas, saying “Do 
ye all proceed to battle with elephants, horses and cars* 
And encircling R&ma only and discharging shafts at him, 
delightedly, like unto clouds, in the rainy season, pouring 
water, do ye slay him. Or I shall slay him to-morrow in the 
presence of all, wounded by you in the mighty encounter 
with sharpened arrows." Hearing the speech of their lord 
the Rikshasas, with a huge army and a host of cars, speedily 
issued out for battle. And they all threw at the monkeys 
life-destroying Parighas, Pattigas, arrows, daggers and 
Parashwadhas . And the monkeys too threw crags and trees 
at the R&kshasas. Thus on the eve of sun set there arose 
a terrible conflict between the R&kshasas and the monkeys. 

* R&ma. t i. to-morrow. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 





143 * 



RAM A YANA. 



And they struck each other in the conflict with clubs, chitra$ H 
Prasas> daggers and Parashwadhas . The conflict being thus 
carried on, there arose a mighty dust which was again 
destroyed by the current of blood gushing out of the persons 
of the Rakshasas and the monkeys. Elephants and cars 
were like the banks of that river of blood, the arrows were 
like the fishes, and the flags were the trees on their banks 
and the corpses were like planks afloat there. Being thus 
wounded and assailed by the Rakshasas, those heroic 
monkeys leaped and broke down the flags, armours, 
cars, horses and other weapons. And with their sharp 
teeth and nails they scratched the hair, ears, foreheads 
and the noses of the Rakshasas. Like unto vultures 
falling upon a felled tree, hundreds of monkeys fell upon 
one Rakshasa in that encounter. And the Rakshasas 
resembling mountains, with huge clubs, prasas , daggers and 
parashwadhas , struck the monkeys (in their turn). Being thus 
assailed by the Rakshasas, the mighty host of moukeys 
took refuge of Rama, the son of Da 9 aratha, the worthy refuge 
of all creatures. Thereupon the highly effulgent and power- 
ful Rama, taking up his bow, entered the Rakshasa host 
and began to make a downpour of arrows. And Rama 
entering the field, those terrible Rakshasas, being burnt with 
the fire of his arrows, could not stand before him like unto 
clouds disappearing before the Sun in the welkin. And 
the night-rangers only espied the dreadful feats performed 
by Rama and which were above the power of others. 
Except yvhen guiding the huge army or driving the cars they 
could not see Rama like unto the wind invisible in a forest. 
They all beheld the Rakshasa force scattered, wounded, 
burnt down with arrows, broken and assailed with weapons, 
by R3ma, but none could see the quick-moving Rama. As 
people cannot see the soul which governs all objects of 
sense so they could not see Rama, who was thus inflicting 
wounds ou them. “It is he who is destroying the soldiers 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



*433 



riding the elephants, it is he who is breaking down the mighty 
cars, and it is he who with sharp arrows is slaying the 
cavalry — rider and horse.” Thus saying those RSkshasas, in 
that conflict and in the very presence of RSina, highly 
enraged, began to slay each other. They were all bewildered 
by the huge Gandharba weapon discharged by the high- 
souled R&ma and so they could not see R5ma, who was thus 
burning down their force. And the RSLkshasas sometimes 
beheld thousands of Rama in the battle field and again saw 
one R£ma only. They at times saw the quick-moving golden 
end of the bow of that high-souled one, resembling a circular 
fire brand but they did not behold R&ghava. And he 
looked like kdla chakra , having his middle body as its navel, 
his own strength as its lustre, the arrow for its radius or 
spoke, the bow for the circumference, the twang of the bow 
for its sound, his power and intelligence for its brightness, 
and the aim of the celestial weapons for its limit. And 
in the eighth division of the time by R5ma alone with 
arrows resembling the flame of fire were destroyed ten 
thousands swift-coursing cars, eighteen thousand elephants 
fourteen thousands horses and riders and two million 
R3kshasa infantry assuming shapes at will. And those night- 
rangers, who were still left, having their horses killed, cars and 
flags broken, fled in fear of life to the city of LankS. And 
the battle field, filled with slain horses elephants and infantry, 
looked like the high-souled and enraged Rudra’s arena of 
sports. Thereupon the celestials with Gandharbas, Siddhas 
and the great ascetics glorified the wonderful feat of Rama. 
And the virtuous-souled R&ma addressed Sugriva, Bibhishana 
the monkey Hanumdn, the leading monkey J&mbavSn, Mainda 
and Divida who were near him, saying — “This is the power of 
my weapons and as well as that of Rudra.” The high-souled 
R&ma, equalling Sakra in prowess, thus slaying the huge 
host of the lord of Rikshasas and assailing them with shafts 
and weapons — the celestials, delighted, sang his praises. 

180 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




434 



RAMA YANA 



SECTION LX LV . 



"By R&ma, of unwearied actions, with flaming arrows 
feathered in burning gold, were destroyed thousands of 
elephants — many horses with their riders, many a car crested 
with flaming banners ; thousands of heroic R&kshasas assum- 
ing shapes at will, engaged by Ravana, and armed with 
clubs and parighas ; and golden pennons. Beholding and 
hearing of this the remaining night-rangers assembled and 
were greatly bewildered, poorly and stricken with anxiety. 
The widows and those who had lost their children or 
kinsmen approached those RSkshasas and overwhelmed 
with grief, bewailed piteously, — “Alas ! why did the aged and 
grim-visaged Surpanakha, having her belly extending down- 
ward, behold in the forest R&ma graceful like Kandarpa. 
And beholding him of great beauty and prowess, ever 
engaged in the welfare of all creatures, that ugly one, worthy 
of being slain by people, was excited with lust. Why 
did that ugly-faced she-demon, devoid of all qualities, address 
R&ma, having a beautiful countenance, gifted with many 
virtues and great effulgence ? Alas for the misfortune of the 
R&kshasas, the aged Rakshasee brought before hirn such a 
vile proposal, hated of all and worthy of creating laughter. 
For the destruction of Khara, Dushana and other R&kshasas 
that ugly one approached Raghava with such a vile intention. 
It was for her that Ravana created enmity (with R&ma) 
and Sit& was carried away by the Ten-necked Rakshasa. 
But he could not spread his influence upon SitSL the daughter 
of king Janaka and deep rooted and eternal became the 
enmity with the highly powerful Raghava. And beholding 
the Rakshasa Bir&dha slain by R&ma alone — (Ravana) 
wishing Vaidehi should have regarded that as a sufficient 
proof of his prowess. And fourteen thousand Rakshasas of 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDHAKANDA M. 



M35 



terrible deeds were slain by him in Janasth&na with shafts 
resembling the flame of fire. Khara, Dushana as well as 
Tri^irSl were slain by him in conflict with arrows resembling 
the Sun — this was a sufficient proof (of his power). 
Yoyanab§hu and Kavandha, drinking blood, were slain by 
him, roaring with wrath — this too was a sufficient proof of 
his power. Rftma slew the powerful VSLli, the son of the 
thousand eyed one, resembling the cloud — that too was the 
sufficient proof of his prowess. By him Sugriva, poorly and 
living in the mount Rishyamukha, having all his desires 
frustrated, was placed on the throne — that too even was 
the sufficient proof of his power. He (RSvana) from foolish- 
ness did not like the becoming speech of Bibhishana 
conducive to the acquirement of piety and wealth and 
securing the welfare of the Rakshasas. Had the younger 
brother of the lord of wealth (R&vana) observed the words of 
Bibhishana, LankSL would not have been overwhelmed with 
grief and reduced to the state of a cremation ground. 
Hearing of the destruction of the highly powerful Kumbha- 
karna by Rama, of the irrepressible Atik&ya by Lakshmana 
as well as of his beloved son Indrajit, RSLvana did not come 
to his senses.* There is audible in every house of the 
RSkshasas, the cry, — ‘My son, my brother, my husband is 
slain in battle.* In conflict have been destroyed by the 
heroic Rama, thousand cars, horses, serpents and infantry. 
Perhaps Rudra, Vishnu, Mahendra or the performer of 
hundred sacrifices, or even Death, in the shape of Rama, 
is slaying us. By Rama all the heroes have been slain — 
despair has taken possession of our minds — we do not 
behold the end of our terror and are bewailing being 



* One sloka has been omitted here by some of the editors, which 
when translated stands thus When one monkey only Hanum&n killed the 
prince Akshaya and reduced the whole city to ashes with the fire of his tail 
RAvana should have come to his senses. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 



RAMA YANA. 



1436 

deprived of our lords. Does not the Ten necked hero, who 
has obtained boons (from BrahinSL) perceive that a mighty 
disaster shall befall him from Rama ? Neither the celestials, 
Gandharbas, Pi^achas nor Rikshasas shall be able to save 
him from Rama in conflict. In every battle many an 
accident befalls R&vana — this bespeaks of his destruction at 
the hands of R&ma. The great Patriarch, being pleased, 
conferred upon R&vana the boon that no fear would proceed 
unto him from the celestials, the Dlnavas or the R&kshasa9 
—but he did not beg of him, security from men. Forsooth, 
he is that fearful man who shall slay I&vana and the 
lUkshasas. The celestials, being thus oppressed by RSLvana, 
who had obtained the boon, worshipped the great Patriarch 
with severe austerities. And being propitiated with them, 
the high-souled Patriarch, for their welfare, addressed the 
celestials, with the following pregnant speech. ‘ From to- 
day shall the RSkshasas and DSnavas roam for ever, 
afraid of the celestials.” Thereupon the celestials headed 
by Indra engaged in propitiating MahUdeva, the slayer of 
Tripura, and who rides upon a bull. And being pleased, 
Mahadeva addressed them, saying, — ‘ For your welfare there 
will be born a woman who shall be the cause of the destruc- 
tion of the RSkshasas.” As hunger, being engaged by 
the celestials, did destroy in olden time, all the Dinavas, 
so shall she (Sita) the root of the extinction of Rakshasa 
race destroy us all with R&vana. Alas ! for the foolish- 
ness of the vicious minded and insolent RSvana destruction 
has faced us and we are overwhelmed with grief. We 
do not see any such being in the world who can afford 
us shelter. R&ghava has attacked us like unto the fire of 
dissolution. There is no refuge for us who have been 
stricken with fear as no help reaches the elephants in a 
forest beset with fire. The high-souled Bibhishana did the 
just tiling in proper time — lie took shelter of him from whom 
he expected dinger.” Tiius bewiiled pietoously and lou lly 



Digitized by 




YUDDHA KA N DA M. 



>437 



—the she-demons holding each other by the neck and being 
stricken with fear and grief. 



SECTION LXLVI. 



Thereupon RSvana heard in every house of Lanka the 
piteous cries of the she-demons possessed by sorrow. And 
sighing hard he engaged in meditation for some time. And 
terrible-looking as he was, RSvana was greatly worked up with 
ire. Having his eyes reddened with anger, and gnashing his 
teeth and biting the lips, that one, irrepressible by other 
R§kshasas, looked like the fire of dissolution incarnate. There- 
upon the lord of R«Lkshasas,in anger, as if burning down every- 
thing with his look, addressed the Rakshas who were near him 
— Mahodara, Mah5p5rsha,Birupaksha — r“Doye speedily speak 
to the soldiers that they should sally out for battle at my 
command. Hearing his speech — those Rakshas, possessed 
by fear, asked by the command of the king, the RSkshasa 
soldiers to be ready. And thereat all those grim-visaged 
R&kshasas saying ‘so be it* and performing benedictory 
ceremonies proceeded to the battle-field. And those mighty 
car-warriors, worshipping R&vana, and desiring the victory 
of their lord, stood before them with folded hands. Thereupon 
Ravana, beside himself with anger, laughing, adddressed 
those R&kshasas, Mahodara, Mah5p3rsha, and Birupaksha, 
saying — “To-day shall I despatch both Rama and Lakshmana 
to the abode of Death with arrows resembling the sun at the 
time of dissolution, discharged off my bow. And slaying 
the enemies I shall repair the loss of Khara, Kumbhakarna, 
Prahasta and Indrajit. The atmosphere, the quarters the 
sky and the deep being enveloped with the cloud of arrows 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



RAMA YANA . 



1438 

shall become invisible. I shall slay to-day all the heroic 
monkeys with my winged arrows. Ascending my car gilted 
with the velocity of the wind shall I churn to day the 
monkey host with arrow-like waves coming from the ocean-like 
bow. I shall. like an elephant distress to-day the monkey-like 
pools having their countenances for the blown lotuses, and 
the lustre of their bodies for the filaments. To-day in the 
encounter, the leaders of the monkey hosts, with their heads 
transfixed with arrows, shall cover the earth, like unto lotuses 
with their stalks. I shall to-day with a single arrow, cleave 
hundreds of heroic monkeys fighting with trees in their hands. 
I shall wipe to-day the tears of those whose brother or son has 
been slain by destroying their foe. In the encounter to-day 
I shall, with the monkeys deprived of their breath and clept 
with my arrows, so cover the earth that it may not be seen 
by any. I shall satisfy to-day with the flesh of the enemies 
slain by my shafts, the crows, vultures and others who live 
upon flesh. Get ready soon my car and bring my bow. And 
let the remaining night-rangers follow me in battle.” 
Hearing his words MahSparsha addressed the leaders of the 
army who were near him, saying, — “Get your soldiers ready.” 
And the commanders too quickly went round all the houses 
in Lanka and asked the Rakshasas to be ready soon. 
Thereupon began to issue out in a moment terrible-lookir.e 
Rakshasas, emitting roars, having dreadful faces and with 
various weapons in their hands — daggers, Pattigas, maces, 
clubs, furrows, sharpened saktis, traps, various rods, sharpened 
chakra , parashwadhas, vindipalas. satdghnis and various 
other excellent weapons. Thereupon at the command of 
RSvana the commanders brought one Nijuta (a hundred 
thousand) cars, three Nijuta elephants, sixty million horses, 
asses and camels and numberless infantry. They arranged 
the soldiers before the king and in the interval the charioteer 
brought the car — filled with excellent celestial weapons— 
richly adorned, containing many an armour, girt with a 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1 439 



network of tinkling ornaments crested with various jewels, 
having jewelled pillars and a thousand golden jars. 
Beholding the car the R&kshasas were greatly astonished. 
And R&vana, the lord of Rakshasas, rising up all on a sudden, 
ascended that car, brilliant like the flaming fire and the 
aggregate rays of a million sun, quick-coursing, having a 
charioteer, drawn by eight horses, huge and shining in its 
native lustre. Thereupon proceeded R&vana, encircled by 
many a Rakshasa as if rending the earth with the excess 
of his prowess. There arose a huge sound of bugles 
accompanied with that of Mridangas, drums, conchs, and 
kalapas . The lord of the Rakshas — wicked, the slayer of the 
Brahmins — the thorn of the celestials, and who hath brought 
away Sit §, by stealth, has come with his umbrallas and 
chowries to fight with the foremost of Raghus — this cry 
was heard everywhere. And with his tremendous roar the 
earth shook. And hearing all on a sudden that sound, the 
monkeys fled away in fear. And the highly effulgent 
Havana, having huge arms and surrounded by his ministers, 
came there being certain of gaining victory. Being command- 
ed by Ravana, MahSpSrsha, Mahodara and the irrepresible 
Birupaksha ascended the car. They, desirous of winning 
victory, issued out emitting dreadful roars in delight and 
as if rending the earth therewith. Thereupon the highly 
effulgent (Ravana) resembling Death, with uplifted bow, 
sallied out for battle along with the army of Rakshas. And that 
mighty car-warrior, went out in his chariot drawn by quick- 
coursing steeds by that gate which led to where R&ma 
and Lakshmana were. Thereat the sun lost its brilliance 
— the quarters were enshrouded with darkness j the birds sent 
forth dreadful cries and the earth shook. The celestials 
poured down bloody rains — the course of the horses w ? as 
slackened — the vultures sat on the banners and jackals 
emitted inauspicious cries. His left eye and the left arm 
began to shake— his countenance became pale and his voice 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1440 



MAMA YANA . 



grew harsher. The Ten-neeked R&kshasa thus going out for 
battle there appeared many bad omens indicating his destruc- 
tion. From the sky fell a fire-brand accompanied with the 
sound of thunder ; vultures and crows emitted inauspicious 
cries. Disregarding these dreadful omens which appeared 
then, R&vana, incited by death, foolishly went out to slay 
his (enemies). And by the wheel-sound of the chariots of 
the great R&kshasas the host of monkeys calling each other, 
excited with anger and willing to gain victory, addressed 
themselves for fight. Thereupon the Ten-necked one, 
enraged, with his arrows feathered in gold, made a* dreadful 
slaughter of the army of monkeys. And some of those 
heroic monkeys were beheaded by Havana — some had their 
hearts rent and others were shorn of their ears. Some had 
their breath choked, some were killed and others had theii* 
sides broken. Some had their hands cut off, and others had 
their eyes put out. And wherever in the encounter, the 
Ten-headed R&kshasa, whirling his eyes in ire, went in his 
car — the monkey leaders could not stand the vehemence of 
his arrows. 



SECTION LX LV II* 



There the earth was covered with monkeys whose bodies 
were rent with the arrows of the Ten-necked (R&vana). As 
the flies cannot stand before the flaming fire so they could 
not bear the vehemence of R&vana’s shafts. Being thus 
assailed with pointed arrows they fled away crying, like unto 
elephants being burnt by fire. And RSLvana with his arrows 
pursued in conflict the course of clouds. Thus slaughtering 
the monkeys the lords of Rlkshasas speedily reached in the 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



144* 



encounter where Rjighava was. And beholding the monkeys 
assailed and afraid Sugriva placing Sushena in charge of a 
gulma* addressed himself for the battle. And placing 
that heroic monkey, his equal in prowess, in that command 
Sugriva sallied out with a tree in his hand to meet the 
enemy. And followed him on all sides the leaders of the 
monkeys with huge crags and various trees. The heroic 
Sugriva emitted terrible roars in the conflict and assailed the 
heroic Rakshasas and many others. The huge-bodied 
monkey-chief crushed the R&kshasas like unto the wind 
uprooting the trees at the time of dissolution. He began to 
make a downpour of crags at the RUkshasa host like unto 
the cloud pouring down hailstorms at the birds in the forest. 
And being beheaded by the crags discharged by that monkey 
chief the Rakshasas fell down like unto mountains cleft. 
The Rakshasas being thus attacked and shattered by Sugriva 
and roaring and falling down on all sides, an irrepressible 
R&kshasa, skilled in archery, by name Birupaksha, pronounc- 
ing his own name, got down from the car and mounted an 
elephant. And mounted on the elephant that highly 
powerful Birupaksha sent forth leonine roars and dashed 
against the monkeys. Exciting the joy of the Rakshasas 
and removing their anxiety he discharged dreadful shafts at 
Sugriva and his army. And being assailed by the pointed 
arrows of that Rikshasa that lord of monkeys roared in 
anger and made up his mind to destroy him. Thereupon 
uprooting a tree the heroic monkey, skilled in warfare, leaped 
and struck that huge elephant down in his presence. And 
being assailed greatly by Sugriva that huge elephant 
proceeded a little within the range of the bow and roared 
and died. And being greatly enraged on the destruction of 
that elephant the highly powerful Rakshasa dashed forward 
to face the enemy. That one of quick movements took up 

* The division of an army ; a body of troops consisting of nine platoons or 
nine elephants, nine chariots, twenty-seven horses and forty-five foot. 

1 8 1 



Digitized by t^ooQie 



M4* 



RAMA YANA . 



his dagger and armour and viling, approached Sagriva, And 
beholding his "movement Sugriva took up a huge crag 
resembling cloud and hurled it against Birup&ksha. That 
highly powerful leading RSkshasa, finding the crag about to 
fall, turned a little away and struck the monkey with his 
dagger. And being assailed with dagger by that powerful 
R&kshasa the monkey remained senseless for sometime on 
the ground. And rising up all on a sudden he, clenching 
his fist, struck that R£kshasa in the mighty encounter on his 
breast and got him down. Being struck with the fist the 
night-ranger Birup&ksha greatly enraged cut down with his 
dagger Sugriva’s armour and tumbled him down with his 
feet. And the monkey rising up again was about to deal 
him a blow, hard as a thunder-bolt, with a dreadful sound. 
And receding a little, he baffled its aim and returned one on 
Sugriva’s breast. Finding his aim baffled and himself struck 
in return by the R&kshasa, Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, was 
excited with anger. And the monkey-chief was now on the 
look-out for an oppurtunity to strike Birup&ksha. And 
immediately in anger he struck him down with a blow on 
his forehead. And being thus assailed with the fist 
resembling the thunder-bolt of Mahendra, he fell down on 
the earth bathed in a pool of blood. And blood gushed out 
of the person of Birupaksha like unto water issuing out of 
a fountain. And the monkeys beheld their enemy(BirupSkslia) 
with his eyes disfigured in anger, bathed in a foam of blood, 
his whole body discoloured, trembling, rolling and crying 
piteously. Thereupon those too armies of the monkeys and 
RSkshasas, being ready to engage in the encounter, began to 
roar like unto two mighty oceans having their banks broken. 
And observing that highly powerful. R&kshasa, of discoloured 
eyes, slain by the king of monkeys, the monkeys and 
RSkshasa forces engaged in fight and looked like the rising 
Ganges. 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



* 44 $ 



SECTION LXLVII I. 



Tj ike unto a pond in the summer both the armies became 
gradually reduced. Beholding his own army and BirupSlksha 
slain, RSLvana, the lord of RSkshasas, was doubly excited with 
ire. And observing his army reduced and slain by the 
heroic (monkeys) he perceived ill omens in the fight and was 
accordingly pained at heart. And he addressed Mahodara, 
who was near him* saying, “O thou of great arms, all my 
hopes of success are now centered in thee. Do thou slay 
the enemy’s force, O hero, and display thy prowess. Now 
hath come the time of returning the favours of thy master. 
Do thou fight bravely.” Being thus accosted that R&kshasa- 
chief Mahodara, saying “so be it” entered the enemy's army 
like unto a fly entering into a flame. Excited by his master's 
command and empowered by his own prowess that (RSkshasa) 
gifted with great strength, began to assail the monkeys.. And 
the highly powerful monkeys too taking up huge crags dashed 
against the dreadful army of the enemies and crushed all the 
R&kshasas. And Mahodara, greatly angered, severed in that 
mighty encounter, with his arrows feathered in gold, the 
hands, feet and thighs of the monkeys. Then the monkeys, 
in fear of the RSkshasas, fled away to different quarters and 
some sought shelter of Sugriva. And beholding his powerful 
monkey force thus assailed in the conflict, Sugriva dashed for- 
ward and fronted Mahodara. And taking up a huge and dread- 
ful crag resembling a mountain.the monkey-king hurled it with 
great vehemence to slay him. Thereupon finding that crag 
about to fall,* Mahodara fearlessly severed it with his arrows. 
And being sundered into a thousand pieces by the arrow 
of that R&kshasa, it fell down on the earth like unto a band 
of vultures. And beholding that crag thus severed, Sugriva 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



M44 



RAMA YANA 



was beside himself with ire ; and uplifting a sdla tree hurled 
it : and the heroic R&kshasa, the slayer of enemy’s force, 
severed it into several pieces with his arrows. Thereupon 
excited with wrath he saw a parigha on the ground. - And 
hurling that flaming parigha and displaying his (light- 
handedness) he struck his excellent horse therewith. 
And having his horse slain, that hero — the RSkshasa 
Mahodara, ascended his car, and in great anger took 
up his club. Those two heroes, with club and parigha 
in their hands, engaged in battle, roaring like two bulls or 
clouds accompanied with lightning. Thereupon the night- 
ranger Mahodara, inflamed with ire, hurled at Sugriva, the 
club flaming like the Sun. And beholding that dreadful 
club about to fall the highly powerful Sugriva — the lord of 
monkeys, uplifting his parigha struck it therewith. And 
parigha , being sundered, fell quickly down on the earth. 
Thereupon the effulgent Sugriva picked up from the ground 
musala made of iron and ornamented with gold. Taking 
that musala up he hurled it at the R&kshasa and who again 
hurled a club ; and both of them being severed fell down on 
the earth. Having their weapons baffled thus, those two heroes, 
gifted with great prowess and effulgence and resembling the 
burning fire, were ready to interchange blows. They, 
emitting roars again and again, struck each other down on 
the earth with their clenched fists. And rising up speedily 
they again assailed each other. Thus those two heroes, 
unsubdued, struck each other with their arms. Thereupon 
both of them, highly proficient in fighting with arms, were 
greatly exhausted. Thereupon they took up daggers. And 
uplifting them, (those two heroes) with their persons trembl- 
ing in ire, proficient in fighting and skilled in the use of 
weapons, dashed on roaring. And both of them enraged with 
each other and anxious to score success, moving in circle 
on each other’s right side, addressed themselves for 
action. Thereupon the vicious- minded, heroic Mahodara, 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



M45 



gifted with great vehemence and proud of his own heroism, 
flung liis dagger at (the monkey's) armour. And as he was 
about to extricate his dagger from the armour, that foremost 
of monkeys severed with his dagger that R&kshasa’s head 
with helmet and kundalas . And beholding the Rikshasa- 
chief fall down on the earth with his head off, his forces 
fled away from the field. And slaying him that monkey-chief, 
delighted, began to roar along with other monkeys. There- 
upon the Ten-necked one became highly enraged and 
RSghava greatly delighted. And all the RSkshasas, with 
their hearts broken and countenances rendered poorly and 
stricken with fear fled away to different quarters. Slaying 
and striking down on earth Mahodara like unto a portion of 
a mighty hill severed, that son of the Sun appeared 
resplendent in his own effulgence and became irrepressible 
like unto the Sun. And winning victory in the action that 
lord of monkeys was espied by the celestials, Siddhas and 
Yakshas along with all creatures on earth, having their 
eyes flushed with joy. 



SECTION LXUX. 



1^[aH 0DARA being thus slain by Sugriva, the highly 
powerful MahSparshwa, having his eyes reddened with ire, 
looked towards him. And the R&kshasa, with his weapons, 
assailed the dreadful army of Angada as well as the leading 
monkeys. The Rakshasa severed the heads from the bodies 
of the monkeys like unto the wind throwing away the 
fruits from trees. And he cut off, with his arrows, the arms 
of some and some were deprived of their sides. The 
monkeys were thus assailed by Mahaparslnva with a shower 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1446 



RAMA YANA . 



of shafts. All the monkeys were thus stricken with grief 
and rendered senseless. And hearing of the anxiety of his 
own army thus assailed by the RSkshasa, Angada, gifted 
with great vehemence, taking his parigha made of iron 
and resembling the rays of the sun, dashed on like the rising 
deep during the lunar half of a month. And that foremost 
of monkeys encountered MahSparshwa, who, thus struck by 
the monkey, became insensible with his charioteer and fell 
down on the earth. Thereupon leaped on the battle field 
the highly powerful and effulgent lord of bears, having the 
hue of red collyrium, with his army resembling the cloud. 
And excited with ire, he, taking up a huge crag resembling 
the summit of a mountain, speedily struck down his horses 
and broke down his car. And regaining his senses in a 
moment the highly powerful Mah3parshwa, again assailed 
Angada with many arrows. He struck JjtmvabSn, the 
lord of bears, on his breast with three arrows and assailed 
GabSksha with many shafts. And beholding Jamvabin and 
Gab&ksha overwhelmed with arrows, Angada, beside himself 
with ire, took up a dreadful parigha. And holding with 
two hands that parigha made of iron and bright like the 
rays of the sun, Angada, the son of V&li, with his eyes 
reddened in wrath, hurled it at MahSparslnva who was 
stationed at a distance, to slay him. And being hurled by 
the highly powerful (Angada) the parigha , struck down from 
his hands the bow with arrows and the helmet of the 
Rakshasa. And approaching him vehemently, Vali's son, 
gifted with great prowess, in anger, struck him, with 
clenched fist, on his ears having excellent kundalas. There- 
upon Mahaparsluva gifted with great vehemence and efful- 
gence, highly angered, took up in his hands a huge 
parashwadha , sharpened with oil, bright and hard as iron 
and discharged it at Vali’s son, and struck him therewith on 
his left shoulder. And Angada baffled that parashwadha. 
Thereupon that hero, powerful like his own father, clenching 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



447 



his fist, hard as thunder-bolt and resembling even Indra's 
agani y dealt it, in great anger, upon the Raksha’s breast. And 
being struck with that fist the R&kshasa’s breast was shattered 
and he fell down on earth. He falling down on earth slain, 
his soldiers were greatly sorry and R&vana attained to ao 
excess of ire in the conflict. The noise set up by the 
delighted monkeys like unto a dreadful leonine roar, as if 
rending the city of Lanka abounding in edifices and gates, 
resembled the great roar of the celestials along with Indra. 
And hearing the noise of the celestials and monkeys, the lord 
of R&kshasas, the enemy of the gods, in great anger, again 
proceeded towards the battle field. 



section c. 



Beholding Mahodara, MahSpSrsha and the highly 
powerful BirupJlksha slain in the encounter Havana attained 
to an excess of ire. And ordering his charioteer to hurry on 
he gave vent to the following words — “All my courtiers 
have been slain and my city is shut up — 1 shall remove my 
grief consequent on all these by, slaying Rama and 
Lakshmana. I shall destroy Rama-like tree in the conflict 
whose flower is SitSL and whose branches are Sugriva, 
J&mbav&n, Kumuda, Nala, Divida, Mainda, Angada, 
Gandhamadana, Hanum&n and all other leading monkeys.” 
And resounding the ten quarters with the sound of his 
chariot wheels that mighty car-warrior proceeded quickly 
towards RAghava. With that sound all quarters were filled, 
and the earth, with rivers, mountains and forests shook and 
all the lions, deer and birds were terrified. He created a. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



RAM AY AN A. 



144 * 

dreadful darkness with the discharge of his sharp weapons 
and burnt down the monkeys who fled away to different 
directions. Dust was raised on the ground by those monkeys 
assailed and flying to various directions. They were unable 
to withstand the power of that weapon made by BrahmS, 
himself. Beholding his own army, assailed and cut into 
hundred peices by the excellent weapons of RSvana, 
R&ghava dashed forward. And assailing the monkey-host, 
that foremost of R&kshasas espied R&ma, unconquered, at a 
distance with his brother Lakshmana like unto B&sava with 
Vishnu, holding a huge bow like one painted on the sky, 
having expansive eyes like lotus-petals, long arms, and 
always subduing the enemies. Beholding the monkeys slain 
in the encounter and R5vana approach, the heroic and highly 
powerful R&ma, with Sumitr&’s son in his company, 
delightedly set arrows on his bow. And as if rending the 
whole earth with that dreadful sound he began to draw the 
string of his excellent bow. With the sound of R&vana's 
arrows and the twang of Rama’s bow hundreds of 
Rakshasas fell down on earth. And coming within the range 
of the arrows of those two princes, Ravana appeared like 
RShu in presence of the sun and the moon. And desiring 
to fight with him first Lakshmana setting sharp arrows on 
his bow, discharged shafts at him resembling the flame of 
fire. And the highly powerful Ravana too with his arrows 
stopped the course of those shafts in the sky as soon as 
they were discharged by Lakshmana, skilled in archery. 
And displaying his light-handedness, he, with one arrow, 
severed Lakshmana's one, with three his three and with ten 
his ten. Surpassing thus the son of SumitrSL, Ravana, ever 
victorious in battle, confronted R5ma in the encounter, 
standing like another hill. And approaching R§ghava, 
R5vana the lord of Rakshasas, with his eyes reddened in 
ire, began to make a shower of arrows. Thereupon beholding 
the arrows shot off Rarana’s bow fall on all sides, Rama 



Digitized by L^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM \ 



1449 



speedily took up a valla!* And RSghava sundered with his 
sharp valla his dreadful arrows flaming and resembl- 
ing poisonous serpents. With various sharpened arrows 
R&ghava assailed R&vana, and he again assailed R&ma in 
return. And forming a circle, they passed each other by 
the right side. Uprooting the earth with the vehemence of 
their arrows, irrepressible by each other, fighting equally 
discharging arrows, they looked dreadful like Death himself 
—and created terror in all creatures. The sky was filled 
with their various weapons, like unto clouds in the rainy 
season accompanied with lightning. And the welkin 
appeared full of windows with that shower of arrows, sharp- 
ened, shot with great vehemence and winged like vultures. 
The earth was stricken with darkness caused by these arrows 
like unto clouds appearing after sunset. There took place a 
dreadful conflict between them, desiring to slay each other, 
having their prowess unknown and fighting like Vitra and 
VSsava. Both of them were proficient in archery, skilled in 
the art of conflict and foremost of those conversant with 
the use of weapons. And they began to veer round the 
battle-field. And wherever they went, there appeared arrows 
like unto waves of the deep roused by the winds. Then that 
destroyer of creatures — RSvana— with his hand engaged 
in discharging shafts, shot at RSLma's forehead a network of 
arrows. And thereat R£ma on his head bore that sliQwer 
of shafts shot from his terrific bow, having the lustre of 
the petals of blue lotuses ; nor did he experience any pain. 
And then reciting a formula, the exceedingly energetic 
R&ma endowed with prowess, wrought up with wrath, 
engaged in incessantly shooting his shafts, taking his Raudra 
weapon and again seizing his arrows, discharged them at 
that lord of Rakshasas. And alighting at the impenetrable 
mail of the R&kshasa-chief, resembling a mass of mighty 
clouds, those arrows did not then occasion him any pain. 

* An arrow with a crescent shaped head. 

182 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




H5° 



RAMAYANA . 



Again R&ma skilled in all weapons, from a powerful 
weapon discharged arrows at the sovereign of the Rak- 
shasas mounted on his car. And piercing RUvana, those 
like unto five-hooded serpents, resisted by him, entered 
the earth, hissing. Having baffled RSghava's weapon, 
Ravana, transported with passion, took up a dreadful Asura 
weapon ; and discharged sharpened shafts having the faces 
of lions and tigers, and the faces of kankas and kokas 
and the faces of vultures and hawks, and the faces of jackals, 
and the faces of wolves, — with gaping mouths, — and terrific 
of aspect ; five-mouthed and red-hued. And that highly 
powerful one, enraged, sighing like a snake, by his power of 
illusion shot at R&ma other keen arrows having the faces 
of mules and the faces of bears, and the faces of dogs and 
cocks, and the faces of makaras\ and venomous serpents,— 
these as well as others. Covered with that Asura weapon, 
that foremost of the Raghus, himself resembling fire, dis- 
charged an exceedingly vigorous weapon informed with fire ; 
and shot various shafts having faces filled with live flames, 
and faces like unto suns, — and hued like unto planets and 
stars, — and furnished with faces resembling mighty meteors, 
or resembling tongues of lightning. Aud those terrific shafts 
of Ravana, resisted by Raghava's weapon, were annihilated 
in the sky, and destroyed (monkeys) by thousands. And 
seeing that weapon (of Ravana) destroyed by Rtma of 
untiring deeds, all those heroes, the monkeys — headed by 
Sugriva, capable of wearing forms at will, shouted, surround- 
ing Raghava. And the high-souled son of Da9aratha— 
Righava — having by his might destroyed that weapon 
discharged by Ravana’s arms, was delighted ; and the 
monkey-chiefs, filled with gl^e, began to emit shouts. 

* Koka—a ruddy goose. It may also mean a lizard, a chamaleon, a wolf. 

t A marine monster, generally confounded with the alligator and the 
shark : but really a fabulous animal. — T. 



Digitized by C^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1451 



SECTION Cl. 



O N that weapon of his having been baffled, Havana — 
lord of the RSkshasas — was fired with double fury, and the 
highly effulgent Ravana from wrath set about discharging 
at Raghava a dreadful Raudra weapon, which had been 
conferred on him by Mayai And from his bow began to 
issue forth in large numbers darts and maces and clubs, 
flaming and having the might of thunder; and various kinds 
of sharp clubs and daggers and nooses and flaming thunder- 
bolts began to descend like unto the winds at the universal 
tumbling. And thereupon the graceful and exceedingly 
effulgent Raghava — foremost of those accomplished in noble 
arms — resisted that weapon with a powerful Gftndharva 
weapon. On that weapon being baffled by the high-souled 
Rctghava, Ravana, with his eyes rendered coppery with 
passion, took up a Solar weapon. Thereupon from the how 
of the wondrous vehement and intelligent Ten-necked one 
rushed out discuses flaming and mighty. And the firmament 
all round blazed up with those impendent (arms), as blaze up 
the cardinal quarters on the Sun and the Moon and the 
planets dropping down. Thereat Raghava in the van of 
that army by means of vollies of shafts cut off Havana's 
wonderful weapons and discuses. And seeing that weapon 
destroyed, Havana — lord of Rakshasas — with ten arrows 
pierced Rama all through his vitals. And pierced by Ravana 
with those ten shafts discharged from his mighty bow, the 
exceedingly powerful Raghava did not so much shake. 
Then Raghava — victor in fight — waxing wondrous wroth, 
with countless shafts pierced Ravana all over his person. In 
the meanwhile Raghava's younger brother, the mighty 
Lakshmana — destroyer of foes — growing enraged, took up 
seven arrows. And with those highly impetuous arrows 



Digitized by t^ooQie 



145 * 



RAMA YANA. 



that exceedingly effulgent one severed the human-headed 
standard of R£vana. And the mighty and graceful 
Lakshmana with a shaft cut off the head of the Nairita’s 
charioteer, illumined with ear-rings. And then with five 
sharpened arrows Lakshmana severed the bow of the 
R&kshasa-chief, resembling the trunk of an elephant. And 
Bibhishana, bounding up, with his mace despatched R£vana’s 
excellent steeds, resembling hills or dark-blue clouds. 
Thereat, leaping down from his mighty car, whose horses 
had been slain, R&vana was- fired with high wrath against liis 
brother. And the powerful lord of R&kshasas endowed with 
immense strength, hurled at Bibhishana a dart resembling 
the flaming thunder-bolt. And ere the dart had reached its 
destination, Lakshmana severed it with three shafts ; and 
thereat in that mighty conflict there arose a mighty uproar 
from the monkeys. And the dart dight with networks of 
gold fell down in three fragments, as droppeth a migh ty 
meteor from the firmament, flaming and shooting out 
scintillations. Then (Rivana) took up a huge dart, glowing 
in its own energy, celebrated as being irrisistible, and 
incapable of being borne by the Destroyer himself. On 
being whirled by the impious and strong R&vana, the dart 
possessed of exceeding energy, flamed up. In the mean- 
while the heroic Lakshmana swiftly came to the side of 
Bibhishana,* whose life was placed in peril. And in order to 
save him, that hero — Lakshmana— drawing his bow, covered 
the dart-handed R&vana with showers of shafts. On being 
covered with arrows shot by that high souled one, RUvana, 
with his prowess baffled, made up his mind to let (his 
brother) go. And seeing his brother delivered by Lakshmana, 
R&vana, facing Lakshmana, spoke these words, — “O thou 
proud of thy prowess ! as Bibhishana hath this wise 
been delivered by thee, passing by the Rakshasa, this dart, 

* The commentator explains : “Himself coming before the dart, 
Lakshmana saved Bibhishana.” — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKANDA M. 



>453 



discharged from my bludgeon of an arm, will depart, 
depriving thee of thy 1 i f e * Having said this, R&vana, 
waxing furiously enraged, discharged at Lakshmana that 
dart forged by Maya with his power of illusion, furnished with 
eight bells, having mighty sounds, — incapable of being 
resisted, — competent to finish foes ; and flaming in energy,— 
and shouted simultaneously. And hurled with terrific force, 
the dart sending sounds resembling that of Vajra or the 
thunder-bolt, vehemently alighted at Lakshmana in that 
encounter. Thereat, as the dart descended, RSghava 
addressed* it, saying, — “Peace be to Lakshmana ! Be thou 
fraustrated ; and let thy energy go out of thee.” But the 
dart discharged in the encounter by the enraged R&vana, 
resembling a venomous serpent, dived into the dauntless and 
heroic Lakshmana ; and (the dart) exceedingly splendid and 
blazing, possessed of dreadful impetuosity; and resembling 
the tongue of the king of serpents, smote Lakshmana in his 
mighty chest. And with his breast riven by the dart, 
driving deep through the force of RSvana, Lakshmana fell 
down to the earth. And R&ghava, standing by, seeing 
Lakshmana in that plight, bad his heart overspread with 
sorrow. But reflecting only for a while, he, with his eyes 
surcharged with tears, was filled with greater martial ardour, 
and resembled the fire risen at the universal dissolution. 
Then thinking, — ‘This is not the time to indulge in grief ;* 
he, gazing at Lakshmana, entered into a terrific encounter, 
resolved upon slaying Ravana, laying under contribution his 
dearest energies. And R3ma saw Lakshmana with his 
chest riven by the dart in the mighty conflict, lying drenched 
in blood, and resembling a hill with serpents present in 
it. — And in spite of all their efforts, the foremost monkeys 
failed to extract the dart which had been hurled by the 
powerful Rivana. — And, further, they were (all the while) 
sore assailed with showers of shafts by the foremost 

* i. e. as R&m&nuya remarks, addressed the deity presiding over it.— T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





*454 



RAM A YANA 



RAkshasa of them all. The dart, having pierced Sumitr3. v s 
son, had entered the earth. In the encounter the miglity 
Rama, grasping the dreadful dart with his hands, extracted 
the same and wrathfully snapped it * As he (Rama) was 
engaged in pulling the dart out, the mighty RAvana kept 
pouring marrow-piercing shafts all over his person. Think- 
ing nothing of those arrows, Rama, embracing Lakshman*, 
spoke unto HanumSn and the mighty monkey, Sugriva,— 
* Ye foremost of monkeys, do ye stay here, surrounding 
Lakshmana. The opportunity for putting forth my prowess 
which I had sought, is present. I shall slay this wicked- 
minded Ten-necked one, who is resolved to pursue the 
course of unrighteousness. Even as on the expiry of summer 
the Ch&taka is eager for the sight of clouds, I had long been 
eager to obtain a > sight of (Ravana.) Ye monkey*, this, I 
swear unto you, — this very hour not long after ye will see 
this world without RSvana or RSlma. To-day having slain 
R&vana in battle, I shall renounce all sorrow arising from the 
loss of my kingdom, from my sojourn in the woods, from 
my wandering in Dandaka, from the ravishment of Vaidehi, 
from encounter with the Rakshas, — all the terrible evils that 
I have suffered, and all the troubles resembling hell. He 
for whom I have brought over the monkey-forces, made 
Sugriva king, slaying Vali in battle, for whom I have crossed 
the ocean and constructed a bridge over the deep — the 
same hath been come at by me in conflict, and the same 
hath come within the range of my vision. — And having come 
within my ken, Ravana will not live, even as one coming 
within ken of a serpent of poisonous sight, doth not live ; 
or even as a serpent doth not live, coming within ken of 
Vinat&’st son. Do ye. ye irrepressible ones, ye foremost of 

* The commentator has a characteristic note. This dart, having pierced 
the foe, used always to return to RAvana. But RAma, who was the Lord 
himself, having spoken to it as he did, it could not this time go back ; and 
Rima snapped it, which none else could do.’ ! — T. 

t Garura. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUD DHAKA NDAM. 



*455 



monkeys, seated at the brow of the mountain , behold the 
battle between me and Ravana. To day let the three 
worlds with the Gandharvas, and the Siddhas, and the 
Charanas, see that for which R£ma is Rama. To-day I shall 
do a deed of which the worlds with the mobile and the 
immobile and the gods, shall speak as long as the Earth 
sustaineth (creatures.)” Having delivered himself thus, 
R&ma, concentrating his attention, began to charge the Ten- 
necked one in encounter with whetted arrows decked with 
burnished gold. And in the same way R&vana showered 
on R£ma great ndrdckas and clubs, even as clouds pour 
down showers. And there arose a tremendous uproar of 
mighty arrows discharged by Rama and Ravana, smiting one 
another. And the shafts shot by R&ma and R&vana, severed 
and scattered, with flaming heads dropped to the Earth. 
And the mighty twangs of the bow-strings of both, terrifying 
all creatures, were wonderful to behold.* And then even as 
clouds disperse on being trampled by the Winds, Ravana, 
covered with showers of arrowy networks by that high souled 
one and reduced to sore straits by that one (R&ma) of a glow- 
ing bow, fled away in fear. 



SECTION Cll. 



Seeing the heroic Lakshmana brought down by the dart 
discharged by the powerful R&vana, and lying drenched in 
blood, he (R3ma) after having fought furiously with the 
wicked minded Ravana, — and having showered vollies of 
shafts, addressed Susbena, saying, — “This heroic Lakshmana 

* Adbhutadarqana — wonderful • to behold , — wonderful to witness is the 
sense. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





U5 6 



RAM A YANA . 



brought down to the earth by the prowess of RUvana, lielh 
like a serpent, enhancing my sorrow. Seeing this hero, 
dearer to me than life, what power have I, with my soul 
overwhelmed with dole, to fight ? If this brother of mine 
graced with auspicious marks, delighting in battle, breathe 
his last, what 9hall life avail me or happiness ? My prowess 
is ashamed ; my bow falleth off from my hand ; my arrows 
droop ; my sight is dimmed with tears ; my limbs weaken 
as do those of men in a dream ; thought racks me ; and I 
even desire deaths Seeing his brother wounded by the 
wicked-minded RSLvana, crying in preternatural accent*, 
and sore stricken in his vitals, (R5ma) overcome by a mighty 
sorrow, lamented with his senses wildered. “Seeing my 
brother, Lakshmana, wounded, and lying over the dust of the 
field, even victory, O hero, doth not seem to me sweet. If 
the Moon is hid from the sight, whom doth he then delight ? 
What have I to do with battle ? What have I to do with 
life ? I have no more to do anything with fighting, seeing 
that this Lakshmana wounded, lieth in the field of battle. 
As this highly effulgent one had followed me into the 
forest, so will I in the same way follow him to the abode of 
Yama. Ever seeking my welfare and ever devoted to me, he 
hath been reduced to this pass by Rakshasas fighting in 
crooked ways. In land after land one meets with wives, in 
land after land one meets with friends, but country find 
I none where a uterine brother may be met with. What, 
O irrepressible one, shall I do with the kingdom without 
my Lakshmana ? And what shall I say unto mother SumitrS, 
fond of her son ? And I shall never be able to bear the 
reproach SumitrS shall cast upon me. And what shall I say 
unto Kau^alyi, and what unto mother Kaikeyi ? And what 
shall I say unto Bharata, and what unto the exceedingly 
powerful Satrughna f ‘Thou hadst gone to the woods with 
him. Why then dost thou come (back) without him ?* 'Tis 
better (for me) to renounce my life here, instead of bearing 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1457 



the censure of friends. What a sin had I committed in 
another birth, seeing that my virtuous brother, staying before 
me, hath been slain ? Ah, my brother ! Thou best of men ! 
O master, who wert the foremost of heroes ! Why, forsaking 
me, dost thou repair to the other regions. Wherefore, 
brother, dost thou not speak to me, who am lamenting ? Get 
up. See ! Why dost thou lie down ? Look on me with 
thine eyes. 0 mighty-armed one, in the woods and mountains 
thou didst ever use to cheer me, tried by grief and pining in 
despondency, with my mind overwhelmed (with woe).” As 
R£ma was speaking thus with his senses overwhelmed 
with emotion, Sushena, soothing him, spoke these pregnant 
words, — “O foremost of men, cast off this train of thought 
tending to overwhelm thy understanding, — this anxiety giving 
birth to grief, and resembling the shafts of foes in the van of 
the embattled forces. Lakshmana enhancer of auspiciousness 
is not dead. His face is not distorted or blackened. Do 
thou look at his countenance, which is beautifully bright and 
cheerful. His hands have palms resembling lotus-petals, and 
his eyes are pleasant. O king, one dead doth not look thus. 
(Therefore), O hero, do not grieve. O subduer of enemies, 
this one is instinct with life. As he is lying down on the ground, 
stretched at length, his heart, O hero, trembling momentarily, 
testifieth to his respiration.” Having spoken thus unto 
Raghava, the highly wise Sushena thus addressed the mighty 
monkey, HanumSLn, saying,— “O placid one, hieing hence to 
the mountain, Mahodaya, which, O hero, had formerly been 
mentioned unto thee by Jambavan, bring hither the mighty 
drug sprung at its right summit— Vi 9 alyakarani by name, and 
Savarnyakarani,* and Sanjivakarani, O hero, and the potent 
medicine — Sandhani. Do thou bring (these) in order that the 
hero — Lakshmana — may be revived.” Having been thus in- 
structed, Hanuman, repairing to the Medicinal mountain, was 
wrought up with anxiety, not knowing the drugs. And then 

* Lit.-rthdit which restores the former complexion. — T. 

183 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





1458 



RAMA YANA . 



the thought sprang up in the mind of the Wind-god’s offspring 
of immeasurable prowess, — *1 shall go, even taking this 
(entire) summit of the mountain. In this very summit must 
that delightful drug have sprung. This I infer, inasmuch as 
Sushena had forsooth said so. If I fail to take Vi^alyakarani, 
I shall come by disgrace, — and if I spend much time (in 
thought), that would be fraught with evil.”* Having reflected 
thus, the exceedingly powerful Hanuman, foremost of monkeys, 
— swiftly drawing up to that best of mountains, and giving 
three shakes to the mountain filled with various flowering 
trees, — raised it up with his hands. And taking that summit 
of the mountain resembling dark-blue clouds charged with 
rain, Hanuman from the earth bounded up into the sky. And 
arriving (at his quarters), that wondrous vehement one, put- 
ting down the mountain-peak, and reposing for a while, spoke 
unto Sushena, — “I did not find the drug, O best of monkeys ; 
and therefore have I brought this entire summit of the 
mountain.” When the Wind-god’s offspring had spoken 
thus, that foremost of monkeys— Sushena — praising him, 
uprooted the herb and secured it. Seeing Hanum^n’s feat, 
incapable of being done by even the celestials, the choicest 
of the monkeys were amazed. Then crushing the healing 
herb, that best of monkeys — the exceedingly effulgent 
Sushena, made Lakshmana smell the same. And thereupon 
the wounded Lakshmana, — slayer of hostile heroes — smelling 
it, cured of his wound and ailments, speedily rose up from 
the ground. Seeing Lakshmana rise up from the earth, the 
monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, honoring Lakshmana, 

exclaimed, “Excellent j Excellent !” “Come !” said that 
slayer of hostile heroes — Rama — and with his eyes filled 
with tears, he deeply embraced Lakshmana. And having 
embraced Sumitr&’s son, Raghava then addressed him, 

* Explains the commentator : ‘If I take any other medicine by mistake, 

I shall make a fool of myself ; if I spend much time in thought, Lakshmana 
may die.’ — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 



YUDDHAKANDAM . 






saying,— 1 “By good fortune it is that, O hero, I see thee 
returned from (the mansion of) Death. — Verily my life, or 
SitS. f or Victory is worthless (without thee). And thou being 
dead, what is my life worth When the high-souled 
Raghava had spoken thus, Lakshmana, aggrieved on account 
of the words (of Raghava) expressive of infirmity of purpose, 
said, — “Having bound thyself by that vow, it doth not, O 
thou having truth for prowess, behove thee to speak like one 
fickle and feeble. Those speaking the truth, never falsify 
their promise : the mark of a great one is even observance 
of vow. O sinless one, do not suffer thyself to be overcome 
by despair on my account. Do thou to-day by slaying 
Havana, make thy promise good. Thy foe coming within 
the sway of thy shafts, will not hence, living, even like a 
mighty elephant coming before a sharp-toothed roaring lion. 
I wish the speedy destruction of this impious one, ere the 
maker of day, having performed his work, has ascended the 
Setting-hill. If thou wishest to slay Ravana in battle, if thou 
desirest to recover the princess, then, O noble one, O hero, 
to-day speedily set about what I say.” 



section cm. 



Hearing the words uttered by Lakshmana, that slayer 
of hostile heroes — Raghava — endued with prowess, taking 
his bow, set shafts on it, and in the brunt of battle began to 
discharge dreadful arrows at Ravana. And mounted on 
another car, Ravana — lord of Rakshasas — rushed against 
Kakutstha, even as Swarbhanu rusheth against the Sun. 
And even as a mass of clouds poureth down torrents on a 
mighty mountain, the Ten-necked one, mounted on his car, 



Digitized by 




1460 



RAMA YANA. 



smote Rama with shafts resembling} thunder-bolts. And in 
the encounter Rama, concentrating his thoughts, showered 
on the Ten-necked one arrows embellished with gold and 
looking like living fire. And celestials and Gandharvas and 
JKinnaras declared that there had been no other battle like 
unto the encounter of RSma stationed on the ground and 
the Raksha mounted on his car. Then the foremost of 
celestials— Sakra-— hearing their ambrosial speech, summon- 
ing M§tali, said, — "Taking my car, hie to the best of the 
Raghus. And reaching the earth, do thou, welcoming (him), 
bring about great good unto the gods.” Thus accosted by 
the sovereign of the celestials, M&tali — celestial charioteer 
—bending down his head, addressed that celestial, saying, — 
"Speedily shall I go, O lord of the celestials ; and I shall 
also do the office of a charioteer (unto RSghava).” Then 
yoking with steeds that best of cars, curiously wrought with 
gold ; adorned with hundreds of small bells ; resembling the 
Sun new risen ; having its pole studded with lapises ; yoked 
with excellent horses caparisoned in gold ; furnished with white 
chowris,— drawn by steeds resembling the Sun ; decked with 

golden net-works, — and provided with a golden standard, 

the graceful car of the sovereign of the celestials, — MStali, 
commanded by the king of the immortals, ascending the car,- 
went out of the celestial regions and came to Kakutstha. 
And with his hand holding the reins, the charioteer ef the 
thousand-eyed (Deity) with joined hands addressed RSma, 
saying, — "O Kakutstha, in order that thou mayst obtain the 
victory, the thousand-eyed (god) hath sent thee this car. 
And, O exceedingly powerful one! O graceful (hero)! O 
thou that slayest thy foes ! this is the redoubtable bow of 
Indra, — and this is the mail resembling fire, — and these are 
the arrows looking like the very Sun ; and this is the dart 
shining and fraught with fair fortune. Ascend thou this car, 

♦ This conversation between R&ma and Lakshmana took place, says the 
commentator, on the first day of the lighted fortnight. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDAM. 1 46 1 

O hero. Slay the Rakshasa— Ravana, with me as thy 
charioteer, even as the lord of the celestials slayeth 
Danavas.” Thus addressed, Rama, going round the car 
and saluting it, ascended the same, illumining the worlds 
with his splendour. And the encounter that took place 
between the two cars with the mighty-armed Rama (on one 
side) f and the Raksha — Ravana — (on the other), was wonderful 
to behold. And Righava highly proficient in weapons with 
a G&ndharva weapon resisted the Gandharva weapon of the 
Rakshasa king, and with a celestial weapon, his celestial 
weapon. And then that lord of Rakshasas — the night-ranger 
•—fired with high rage, again discharged an exceedingly 
dreadful Rakshasa weapon. And the gold-decked shafts 
shot from Ravana’s bow, becoming furiously venomous 
serpents, covered K&kutstha. And vomitting living flames, 
they of terrific aspect, having flaming faces, showered over 
RSma with gaping mouths. And those flaming venomous 
serpents, having the feel of VSsuki himself, covered all sides 
and enveloped all quarters. And seeing those serpents 
descending in the encounter, Rama employed a dreadful 
Garura weapon. And discharged from Raghava’s bow, those 
arrows plated with gold at the feathered parts, and furnished 
with the splendour of peacocks, becoming golden birds — • 
began to range (the field of battle) as the enemies of the 
serpents. And the shafts of R&ma capable of wearing forms 
at will, turned into birds, destroyed all the exceedingly swift- 
coursing arrows having the forms of serpents. On his 
weapon having been baffled, Ravana — lord of Rakshasas— 
waxing wroth, poured tremendous showers of shafts on 
Rama. And smiting Rama of untiring deeds with thousands 
of shafts, (Ravana) pierced Matali with vollies of arrows. 
And with an arrow, Ravana severed the standard ; and 
having brought down the golden standard on the floor of the 
car, Ravana wounded even Indra’s steeds with a net-work 
of arrows. And seeing Rama hard pressed,* celestials and 



Digitized by {jOoq ie 




1462 



RAMAYANA . 



Gandharvas, and Charanas along with Dinavas, and Siddhas, 
and the supreme saints were overcome with sadness ; and the 
foremost monkeys together with Bibhishana were aggrieved. 
And seeing a Moon of RSma Chandra in the grasp of a 
R§hu of RSLvana, that bringer of evil unto creatures — Budha 
—stood, assailing the Prayapatya star — Rohini — beloved of 
the Moon. And the enraged Ocean, heaving with smoking 
surges, and flaming as it were, swelled up, seeming to the touch 
the Sun. And the Sun was blackened and assumed a stern 
aspect, with his rays dimmed. And he was seen with ahead- 
less trunk on his lap, and he was in conjunction with a comet. 
And that star of the Koalas, relating to the deities — Indra 
and Agni — AngSraka — stood in the sky, attacking VicSkha. 
And the Ten-necked one, having ten faces and twenty arms, 
equipped with his bow, looked like the mountain — Mainaka. 
And Rama reduced to sore straits by the Ten-necked Raksha, 
could not discharge his arrows in the conflict. And then the 
enraged Rama with his eyes slightly red, flew into a 
tremendous passion, as if burning up the Rakshasas. 
Seeing the face of the enraged Rama endued with under- 
standing, all the creatures were overwhelmed with fear and 
the Earth herself shook. And mountains abounding with 
lions and tigers began to tremble, and trees to shiver. And 
even the deep — lord of streams — was wrought up wondrously. 
And rough and terrific clouds in the sky sent forth fierce roars. 
And stormy clouds rumbling went about the heavens. And 
seeing R&ma wrought up with a mighty passion, and the 
fearful disastrous omens, all creatures were possessed by 
fright and Ravana was struck with dismay. And then 
stationed in the sky, celestials and Gandharvas and mighty 
serpents and saints and Danavas and Daityas and those 
related to Garura — fowls — beheld that conflict like unto the 
universal tumbling, as the two heroes faught on with various 
L- dire arms. And as they looked on the mighty encounter, the 
* celestials and the Asuras, who had come to the conflict, from 



4 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1463 



feeling of regard,* cheerfully spoke (these words). And the 
Asuras staying there said unto the Ten-necked one, ‘Be 
victorious and the celestials again and again said unto 
Rama, ‘Be victorious V In the meantime, the impious 
RSvana, desirous of slaying R§ghava, from wrath took up a 
mighty weapon, fraught with the essence of the thunder- 
bolt $ sending terrible sounds ; capable of destroying all 
foes, — furnished with forks resembling mountain-peaks; 
tending to strike terror unto mind and sight ; sharp-pointed, 
resembling the smoking fire risen at the hour of universal 
dissolution ; exceedingly terrible ; irrisistible (in battle) ; 
unbearable even by the Destroyer, — the terror of all 
creatures— terrific ; and competent to rive (all things). 
Flaming up with wrath, RSvana took this dart. And fired 
with furious wrath, that powerful one took the dart in the 
encounter, surrounded in that contest by many heroic 
Rakshasas. And uplifting (the dart), the huge-bodied 
Ravana, with his eyes reddened in passion, emitted mighty 
roars. And the shouts of the Rakshasa sovereign made the 
earth and the sky and the cardinal quarters and all sides 
tremble. And at the roars of that wicked-minded and 
huge-bodied one, all creatures were struck with terror, and 
the sea was vexed.f And the exceedingly energetic R§vana, 
taking that mighty dart, and sending up furious shouts, 
addressed Rama in a harsh speech, saying,— “O Rama, I 
in wrath uplift this dart having the strength of the levin. 
This will utterly deprive of life thee who art assisted by thy 
brother. O thou that delightest in battle, to-day swiftly 
slaying thee, I shall make thee even with those heroic 
Rakshas slain in the van of the forces. Stay now. O 
R&ghava, thee shall I slay with this dart.” Saying this, the 
lord of the Rakshasas hurled the dart. And discharged from 
Ravana’s hand, (the dart), surrounded with garlands of 

* i. e. each party out of regard for the warrior to whom it wished well.— T. 

t ‘The still -vexed Bermoothes.’ — Tempest . 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1464 



RAMA YANA . 



lightning*, furnished with eight bells, sending mighty roars,— 
rising to the sky, looked exceedingly splendid. Seeing the 
dart, flaming and of terrific aspect, Raghu's son — Rama— 
endowed with prowess, drawing his bow, discharged arrows. 
And with vollies of shafts RSghava resisted the descending 
(dart), even as Vasava extinguished the fire of doomsday 
with his showers. Then even as a flame consumed insects, 
the mighty dart of Havana burnt up those shafts shot from 
the bow of Rama. Seeing those shafts reduced to ashes and 
crushed on coming in contact with the dart, as they were 
coursing in the sky, Raghava was transported with passion. 
And then waxing wondrous wroth, — Raghu's son — Raghava 
—took up a javelin, liked by Vasava himself, brought by 
Matali. And on being wielded by that strong one, the 
javelin, resonant with bells, made the welkin blaze up, like 
a burning meteor on the occasion of universal rack. And 
when hurled, it alighted on that same dart of the R&kshasa- 
chief. And thereat, with its splendour lost, the mighty dart, 
riven, dropped (to the earth.) Then Rama, shooting 
straight-speeding arrows, pierced his (Ravana's) exceedingly 
fleet steeds. And then he pierced Ravana in the chest with 
whetted arrows. And the energetic Raghava hit (R&vana) 
in the temples with three feathered shafts. And thereat with 
all his limbs pierced (with arrows), and his body laved in 
blood, the lord of Rakshasas furnished with many limbs, 
looked like a flowering A^oka. And with his person pierced 
with the shafts of Rama, the lord of night-rangers having his 
body drenched with blood, was stricken with sadness in the 
midst of his forces, — and was also overwhelmed with terrific 
wrath. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1465 



SECTION C l Vi 



O N being greatly harassed by K&kutstha in anger, 
Ravana, delightiug in battle, came under the sway of a 
towering passion. And with his eyes aglow, that powerful 
one from wrath and fury assailed Raghava in mighty. 
encounter. And even as clouds pour down from the sky on a 
pool, R&vana showered thousands of arrows on Raghava. 
And covered with vollies of shafts discharged from (Ravana’s) 
bow in the conflict, Kakutstha like unto a mighty mountain 
did not shake. And that one endowed with prowess stood 
in the field, resisting those networks of arrows, and took up 
shafts resembling the rays of the Sun. Then the fleet-handed 
night-ranger, fired with rage, discharged a thousand arrows 
at the chest of the high-souled Raghava. — And thereat in 
that encounter Lakshmana’s elder brother, with his body 
bathed in blood, appeared like a mighty Kin^mka tree in a 
forest. And with his ire aroused by the blows he received, 
the exceedingly energetic Kakutstha took up arrows 
resembling the Sun risen at the time of the universal 
dissolution. And in the darkness spread by the arrows 
(discharged), Rama and Ravana both fired with wrath could 
not be discovered of each other. Then that hero — Dasaratha's 
son — Rama, overcome with wrath, addressed Ravana, 
laughing, in a harsh speech, saying, — “Thou vilest of 
Rakshasas, in consequence of having through lack of sense 
carried off my wife from Janasthana and brought her under 
thy subjection, thou hast been deprived of thy prowess. 
Having forcibly carried away Vaidehi staying in that mighty 
forest; forlorn and without me, thou thinkest — ‘I am a hero.* 
Outraging the helpless wives of others, — doing this craven 
deed, thou thinkest— ‘I am a hero.* O thou having thy dignity 

184 



Digitized by 



/Google 




1466 



RAM A VAN A. 



destroyed ! 0 shameless wight ! O thou of volatile character 
having through thy violence brought destruction on thyself, 
thou thinkest,— i am a hero.’ A great and famous act hath 
been performed by thee,— a hero, and the brother of the 
Bestower of riches, surrounded with thy forces I To-day 
receive the mighty fruit of that infamous act done through 
pride, productive of evil.* O wicked-minded one, thou 
thinkest of thyself— 1 ] am a hero but thou that hast taken 
away Sit& like a thief, hast no feeling of shame. Hadst thou 
forcibly outraged Sita in my very presence, thou, slain by my 
shafts, wouldst have seen thy brother — Khara. By luck, 
O thou of an evil soul, thou hast come within the range of 
my vision. To-day by means of sharp shafts shall I bring 
thee to death's door. To-day beasts of pray will drag tby 
head having burning ear-ring9, severed by my shafts and 
covered with the dust of the battle-field. O R&vana, vultures 
will alight on thy breast, as thou wilt lie low on the ground ; 
and, athirst, they will drink the blood gushing out from thy 
wounds. To-day fowls of the air will keep pulling at thee 
pierced with my shafts, and lying lifeless, as birds do 
serpents.” Having spoken thus, that slayer of foes — RSma— 
showered arrows on the lord of R&kshasas, staying before. 
And the prowess and strength and spirits and force of arms 
of R£ma burning for the destruction of his foe, were doubled. 
And all the Weaponst presented themselves before that one 
cognisant of self ; and the fleet-handedness of that 
exceedingly powerful one increased immensely from 
exhilaration of spirits. Seeing all these auspicious omens 
coming of themselves, R&ma, finisher of R&kshasas, set about 
smiting his foe more energetically than ever. And assailed 
with stones by the monkeys and showers of shafts by 
R2ghava, the Ten-necked one felt his heart undergoing a 



* Remarks R&m&nuya, ‘here and in the next world/ 
t i. o . the presiding deities of them. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUJDDHAKANDAM. 



1467 



revolution.* And when through the stupifaction of his inner 
self, he could not discharge any weapon, or draw his bow, or 
put forth his prowess, (Rama) did not persist in smiting 
him. And the shafts and various arms discharged by him 
betokened his death ; and his last moments were present. 
And his charioteer, driving his car, perceiving this, calmly 
took the car away from the field of fight. And then, seeing 
the king shorn of prowess, and dropt, his charioteer, struck 
with fear, swiftly turned away his dreadful car having the 
clatter of clouds, and went away from the field of battle. 



SECTION CY. 



A.FTER gradually regaining his senses, RSLvana, urged on 
by the force of the Finisher, getting into a furious passion, 
with his eyes reddened in wrath, addressed the charioteer, 
saying, — *‘0 thou of perverse sense, disregarding me as 
devoid of prowess, and incompetent, and bereft of vigor, — 
as cowardly, light, nerveless and shorn of energy,— and 
as divorced by the power of illusion and debarred by 
arms,— thou actest on thine own understanding. Wherefore 
disregarding me, and not minding my purpose, hast thou 
taken away my car from before the presence of the enemy ? 
O abject one! by thee have my long-earned renown and 
energy and prowess and credit been brought to naught. In 
the very sight of an enemy of renowned prowess, and one 
capable of being gratified with valorous deeds, hast thou 
made me, burning for battle, look as if I were a coward. As, 
O wicked-minded one, thou dost not even through heedlessness, 

* Vighurnahridayah : had his heart paralysed, according to the comment- 
ator. I prefer the sense given as more graphic. — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




RAMA YANA. 



1469 

take the car to the field of battle, I infer for certain that thou 
hast been bribed by the foe. The act that thou hast done, 
doth not appear as that of a friend seeking our welfare ; but 
to-day thou hast acted like an enemy. If thou hast been 
maintained by me, if thou rememberest my merit, do thou 
swiftly turn the car before my enemy has departed.” Thus 
admonished by him of slender sense, the charioteer possessed 
of intelligence, humbly spake unto Ravana words fraught 
with good, — “I am not afraid, nor stupified, nor have I been 
bribed by the foe, nor am I negligent. And 1 have not 
forgotten thy affection or thy good offices. And studious of 
thy welfare, I have saved thy fame \ and with a mind over- 
flowing with affection 1 have done (unto thee) this unpalatable 
good. O mighty monarch, for this, thou shouldst not, like 
a frivolous and base one, criminate me that am ever engaged 
in what is good and dear unto thee. Listen ! I shall render 
thee reason why 1 turned away from the field the car, rushing 
like a river when the sea is swelled up.* I knew that thou 
hadst been fatigued in consequence of thy mighty exertions 
in the fight. And I could not perceive that thy prowess 
then stood superior (to that of the foe).f And the steeds 
of my car were worn out by carrying it; and they were 
battered, and helpless, and perspired like kine in a shower. 
And bad omens fast sprang up before us. And on these 
occurring, I perceived that things would go against us. O 
thou endowed with exceeding might, a charioteer should be 
conversant with season and place, with omens, and the 
expressions of emotions ; as also with depression of spirits, 
exhilaration, and grief. And he should have a knowledge of 
low, level and uneven grounds, and the time for conflict, 
and he should be able to perceive the shortcomings of the 
enemy. And a charioteer mounted on a car, should know 

* On the ascension of the Moon. 

t Two negatives in this verse amounting to an affirmative. This is the 
only instance of djuble negatives in Vilmiki. — T. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



146^ 



when to draw near an enemy, when to turn away from him ; 
when to stay ; and when to turn round from before the foe — 
all these (he should know). What 1, for bringing respite 
unto thee as well as the horses of the car, have done by way 
of removing the terrific exhaustion, is proper. I did not, O 
hero, turn away the car of my own sheer will. What I have 
done, O lord, had been dictated by my affection for thee. 
Command me. What thou sayest, O destroyer of foes ; I will 
do every way, O hero, with my whole soul. Thereat, well- 
pleased with the speech of the charioteer, Ravana, eager 
for encounter, after praising him in various ways, said, — “O 
charioteer, do thou swiftly take the car towards Raghava. 
Without slaying his foe in fight. RSvana turneth not away 
(from the field). 11 Speaking thus, Ravana — lord of Rakshasas 
—gave the charioteer on the car an excellent ornament for 
the hand. Hearing Ravana’s words, the charioteer drove the 
car. And urged on by the speech of Ravana, the charioteer 
drove on the steeds, — and in a moment the mighty chariot 
of the RSkshasa chief appeared before Rama in the field of 
battle. 



SECTION CVT. 



Then the revered Agastya. who, desirous of witnessing 
the fight, had along with the deities come there, — seeing 
Ravana spent with the toil of conflict, staying in the field 
plunged in thought, and stationed before Rama for engaging 
in encounter, — addressed Rama, drawing near to him, saying, 
—“Rama, Rama, O mighty-armed one, hearken to the 
eternal secret, whereby, my child, thou wilt conquer all foes 
in fight, — Aditya-hridaya , ,* sacred, capable of destroying all 

* Lit . — The heart of the Sur. — the designation of a Vcdic Hjmn. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




1470 



HAMA YANA. 



foes, bringing victory — the recitation, enduring and in- 
destructible, —and supremely good ; fraught with all welfare, 
removing every sin, — chasing away anxiety and grief, bring- 
ing length of days ; and excellent. Do thou worship 
Viva 9 wata , s offspring — ; the Sun— lord of the world, furnished 
with rays,— who maketh people engage in work, and who is 
bowed down to by deities and Asuras. This effulgent one, 
producing rays ; is instinct with the spirits of all the deities ; 
and he with his rays ruleth all creatures— and the hosts of 
celestials and Asuras. This Sun is Brahm£ and Vishnu 
and Siva and SkandaW and Praj&pati,W and Mahendraand 
DhanadaW and the Destroyer — Yama— and Soma( rf ) and the 
Lord of waters ; and the Pitris,W and the Vasus, and the 
Sadhya$(/)and the two A^winiste) and the Maruts and Manu,W 
and the Wind-god and the God of fire and the creatures and 
the Creator of life and the seasons. And he is AdityaW and 
Savit&ft) and SuryyaW and Khaga(0 and Push&(*) and 

(a) The celestial generallissimo. The commentator gives a spiritual 
interpretation. ‘He that by means of his rays openeth up the five organs 
of perception.’ 

(A) The lord of all creatures, by virtue of his bringing forth all beings 
through his energy. 

(c) Dispenser of riches, a name of Kuvera. 

( d) Furnished with splendour, a name of the Moon. According to some 
‘endowed with energy.* 

(e) Lit . the ancestral manes. Here the generator of everything. 

(f) An order of semi-divine beings. Here, ‘He who is adored by the 
spiritual.’ 

(g) In virtue of his omnipresence and his being the healer of all ailments. 

(A) All-knowing and being the primaeval sovereign. 

(0 ‘He from whom all derive sustenance.’ 

(j) ‘The producer of heart and the spiritual faculties by heat, and com, etc, 
by showers * 

(k) 'Coursing alone, according to the commentator. It may* also means-^ 
‘He that sets people to work.’ 

(l) ‘Coursing the highest heavens,’ or 9ays the commentator ‘th heavens 
of the heart.’ 

(m) ‘The maintainer.’ 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



147 * 



GavastimSn/^ and the Golden-looking and BhanuW and 
HiranyaretaW and Div2Lkara.(«0 And he is Harida^wa^) and 
Sahasr&rchi(£J and Saptasaptite) and Marichim&n.W And 
he subdueth darkness, and he is SambhuW and TashtSC/) and 
MSrtandakaW and An9um2Ln.(0 And he is Hiranyagarbha/ w J 
Sicira,(») and Tapana,(°) and Ahaskara(/0 and Ravi,(?) and 
Agnigarbha,W and Aditi’s son,($) and Sankha,(0 and 
Siciran&9ana,(«) ByomanStha.M and Tamabheda,(*0 the one 
proficient in Rik, Yajus and Sima ; and Ghanavrishti,(*) and 



fa) Gavastimdn — ‘Ray-furnished, or having the all-permeating Spirit of 
Auspiciousness/ 

( b ) Bhdnu— ‘having brightness.’ 

(c) Hiranyaretd — ‘instinct with the cosmic energy.* 

(d) Divdkara — ‘maker of day.* 

(e) Haridapma — ‘pervading all sides,’ or ‘having black steeds.* 

(/) Sahasrdrcki — ‘thousand-rayed. The commentator explains spiritually, 
He whose cognition points in infinite directions.’ 

( g ) ‘He from whom proceed the seven organs of sense of people.* Or ‘he 
who has seven steeds.* 

(h) ‘Having rays.’ 

(i) ‘He from whom proceed the several sorts of happiness.’ 

(j) ‘He who removes the misfortunes of his votaries.’ 

(k) ‘He that infuses life into the lifeless mundane egg.* 

(l) ‘Having rays.* 

(m) The cause of the creation, preservation and destruction of the 
Universe. 

(») ‘Good-uatured.’ 

(0) Tapa — means ‘wealth.’ Tapana — the possessor of all riches . 

(p) A has— day and Kara— maker. 

(q) Rauti — teacheth — Ravi — he that teacheth . 

(r) Lit. fire-wombed. He that carries the fire of doom within himself. 

(s) Aditi — ‘without destruction’— means 'Brahma knowledge.* 

(1) Supreme happiness. 

(u) The remover of intellectual stupor or evil-mindedness. 

(v) Lord of the welkin. 

( w ) Dispeller of darkness. 

(. x ) He from whom floweth the fruit of acts or he from whom come 
downpours. The latter epithet is justified on grounds of Physical Geography, 
rain being ultimately dependant on solar heat . 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





147* 



RAMA YANA. 



the friend of the Apas,(«) and he that swiftly courseth in the 
Vindhya way. And he is AtapiW andMandali© and Mrityu/«lf 
And he is Pingala,W and the destroyer of everything, and the 
Omniscient, and he having the universe for his form,(/) and 
the exceedingly energetic one, and the beloved of all, and that 
one lording it over all kinds of actions. And he is the lordte) 
of stars and planets and constaiiations, and the origin of 
everything, and the one powerful pre-eminently of powerful 
things,(A) — and the one having twelve forms.© I bow unto thee 
(having these forms and functions). Salutation unto the 
Eastern mount and the mount of the West. Salutation unto 
the lord of the stellar bodies and salutation also unto the lord 
of day. Salutation and salutation unto him that bringeth 
victory, and the joy that springeth up from victory ; and unto 
him of yellow steeds. Salutation, salutation, O thousand-rayed 
one! Salutation and salutation untoAditya. Salutation unto 
him that keepeth his senses under subjection ; Salutation 
and salutation unto the Hero, O’) and unto SarangaW and unto 
him that awakenest the Lotus.© And (salutation) nnto thee, 
O fierce one. Salutation unto the Lord himself of Brahma, 
I^anaO”) and Achchyuta,( w ) and unto Sura(<>) and unto him 

{a) Apas may mean either ‘the good,’ or ‘water/ Vindhya way mean 
either the way known as Brahman&ri or the orbit of the Sun. 

(£) He that is intent on creating the cosmos. 

(c) Ray-crowned or adorned with gems. 

(d) The bringer of death. 

(e) The motive force of the blood-tube called Pingal£. 

(/) Or the ornament of the Universe. 

( g ) i. e. the controller of them, remarks Ramanuja. 

( h ) Such as, observes the commentator, as fire. 

(*) i. e. the months of the year. 

0) Him that leadeth the senses, and that is endowed with the prowess of 
slaying TripurA. etc . 

(£) Him that deservest the pranaba } the holiest formula in all Hindu 
Scripture. 

(/) That awakenest the external lotus as well as the lotus of the heart.~- 

(»0 Siva. (n) Vishnu. (o) The sun. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHARANDAM. 



1473 



that constitutes the knowledge of Aditya, and unto him that 
unfoldeth me and not-me ; and unto the devourer of all, and 
unto the form of the destroyer of the darkness of ignorance. 
Salutation unto the destroyer of darkness, and unto the 
destroyer of enemies, and unto him of immeasurable Soul, 
and unto the destroyer of the ingrate, and unto the deity, 
and unto the lord of all stellar bodies. And salutation unto 
him that boasteth of the splendour of burning gold, unto the 
destroyer of all mental obscurity, — and unto the maker of the 
universe. Salutation unto the remover of darkness ; unto the 
illuminator of the Soul ; unto the all-beholding one of all the 
worlds. The lord createth everything and verily destroyeth 
it. And with his rays he sucketh up, and destroyeth and 
createth (everything). When all are asleep, this one waketh, 
and he is resident in the hearts of all creatures. This one 
is both Agnihotra as well as the fruit reaped by the sacrifices 
thereof. And he constitutes the gods and the sacrifices and 
the fruit also thereof ; and he is the lord of all acts that are 
performed by creatures. If a person recites this (hymn), he, 
O Raghava, doth not come by misfortune, when he is in peril 
of his life, or is ill, or in a lonely place, or in fear. Do thou, 
with concentration, worship this god of gods, this lord of the 
universe. By reciting (this hymn) instinct with the three 
virtues, thou wilt obtain victory in battle. This very instant, 
O mighty-armed one, thou wilt conquer Havana.” Having 
said this, Agastya went whither from he had come. Hearing 
this, that exceedingly energetic one had his grief gone. 
Then, well pleased, Raghava, exerting himself, contemplated 
(the hymn). And reciting this, he beholding the Sun, 
attained excess of joy. And sipping water again and again, 
and becoming purified, that powerful one, taking up his bow, 
and viewing Ravana, advanced with a delighted heart, to 
obtain victory. And he became intent on his death with his 
dearest energies. Then exceedingly delighted, and filled 
with rejoicings, the Sun, in the midst of the celestial hosts 

*85 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1474 



RAMA YANA. 



knowing that the destruction of the Sovereign of the 
night-rangers was at hand, — spoke unto Rama '‘Bestir 
thyself." 



SECTION CVit. 



Then the charioteer fully drove with speed Ravana's car, 
capable of bringing down the hosts of foes, resembling in 
form a city of the Gandharvas, having elevated streamers, 
yoked with surpassingly superb steeds, engarlanded in gold ; 
stocked with war-like implements ; furnished with ensigns 
and standards ; appearing to devour the welkin ; making the 
earth herself resound ; destructive to hostile hosts ; and 
filling its own party with delight. And as it speedily 
descended, the monarch of men beheld that RSkshasa-king’s 
resounding car, having huge standards, yoked with black 
chargers, and endowed with fierce splendour ; as if flaming 
in the firmament 5 having the resplendance of the Sun 
himself ; with thronging lightning pennons $ displaying the 
glow of Indra's weapon ;* showering arms ; and resembling 
rain-charged clouds. Seeing the enemy's car resembling a 
mass of clouds having a chatter resembling the sounds sent 
by a cleaving mountain rived by the thunder, Rama, 
vehemently drawing his bow curved like the infant moon, 
addressed Matali — charioteer unto the thousand-eyed 
( deity ),t saying, — “O Matali, behold the enraged chariot 
of my foe as it courseth on. From the furious speed 
with which he is again wheeling at my right, it appeareth 
that he hath set his heart on slaying me in encounter. Do 

* The rain-bovv. 

f Indra. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM \ 



1475 



thou therefore heedfully drive the car right against the 
vehicle of my foe. I wish to destroy this one even as the 
wind scattereth clouds that have appeared. Do thou with 
all thy wits about thee, without trepidation, and holding thy 
heart as well as thy eye in calmness, swiftly drive the chariot 
ruled by the reins. Worthy of Purandara’s car, thou ought 
not to be taught by me. Desirous of encounter and my 
whole soul bent on fight, I simply remind thee — not teach 
thee.” Pleased with these words of Rama, the excellent 
celestial charioteer — Matali — drove the car. Then leaving 
RSLvana’s mighty car on the right, he enveloped Ravana with 
the dust raised by the wheels. Thereat the Ten-necked one, 
enraged, with his eyes coppery and dilated (in passion), 
covered with arrows Rama staying in front of his car. 
Enraged at the smiting, Rama, with his ire aroused, but 
summoning up patience, took up in the encounter the bow 
of Indra endowed with exceeding vehemence ; as well as 
highly impetuous shafts having the resplendance of the 
solar rays. And then there began a furious encounter 
between those (two) eager for slaying each other; 
confronting each other like unto flaming lions. And then 
desirous of destruction of Ravana, — celestials with 
Gandharvas, and Siddhas and supersaints assembled to go 
to behold the encounter taking place between the two cars. 
And for the destruction of Ravana and the success of 
RSghava, there occurred round about the cars terrible bode- 
ments capable of making people's down stand on end. The 
god poured down showers of blood on the car of Ravana ; 
and a violent tornado eddied on his right. And a mighty 
swarm of vultures, wheeling in the heavens, pursued the car 
wherever it moved. And Lanka was enveloped with evening 
resembling the red java flowers and even in day appeared 
ablaze. Lightnings and firebrands accompanied by a terrible 
sound began to fall down on all sides. And beholding these 
omens inauspicious unto Ravana all the Rakshasas were 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




RAMA YANA. 



1476 

greatly sorry. And wherever R5vana moved the earth shook 
and the hands of all the RSkshasas fighting were as if 
paralysed. The copper coloured, the yellow, the red, and 
the white rays of the sun falling before Ravana appeared 
like melted metals of a mountain. And the jackals 
followed by vultures, vomitting forth fire and casting their 
looks at him, began to emit inauspicious cries. And in that 
battle-field the unfavourable wind began to blow raising dust 
and obstructing the vision of the king of Rakshasas. On 
the R&kshasa host on all sides dreadful lightnings were 
showered without the sound of the clouds. All the quarters 
were enshrouded with darkness and the welkin became 
invisible being covered with darkness. And setting up a 
dreadful quarrel hundreds of terrible Sharikas * began to fall 
down on his chariot. The horses emitted forth sparks of fire 
from their hips and tears from their eyes. These and various 
other dreadful omens arose there announcing the destruction 
of Ravana. And there appeared on all sides many an 
auspicious and good sign intimating the approach of Rama's 
victory. And beholding all those auspicious marks announc- 
ing Rama’s success, Lakshmana was greatly delighted and 
considered Ravana as slain. Thereupon beholding all those 
auspicious signs, Raghava, well qualified to decipher them 
attained an excess of delight and became anxious to display 
a greater prowess. 



♦ A kind of bird (Turdus Salica, Buch). 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



•477 



SECTION CVIM. 



Thereupon there ensued a mighty and dreadful encounter 
of two cars between R&ma and Ravana, creating terror 
unto all people. And the army of Rakshasas and the mighty 
host of the monkeys, although they had weapons in their 
hands, became stupified (for the time being). And beholding 
them (Rama and R&vana) fight, all the Rakshasas and 
monkeys, having their minds agitated, were greatly surprised. 
With various weapons and hands uplifted for fight, they, 
greatly wondered, stood there beholding them and did not 
address themselves to fight with each other. The RSkshasas 
beholding Ravana, and the monkeys beholding R&ma with 
wonder-stricken eyes, the whole army appeared like a 
picture. And espieing all omens Raghava and R3vana 
began to fight, undaunted, firm, resolute and unagitated by 
anger. And determining that KSkutstha would win victory 
and Ravana would die, they began to display their own 
prowess. Thereupon the highly powerful Ravana, setting 
his arrows in anger, discharged them at the pennon stationed 
on Raghava’s car. Those arrows reaching the flag staff 
of the Purandara chariot and perceiving its might fell down 
on the earth. Thereupon the highly powerful Rama, wroth, 
stretching his bow, made up his mind to return the blow. 
And aiming at Ravana’s flag staff he discharged a sharpened 
shaft flaming unbearably by its own lustre like a huge 
serpent. And the effulgent Rama discharged a shaft arming 
at (Ravana’s) banner which, piercing the Ten-necked demon’s 
flag fell, down on the earth. And beholding his flag staff 
thus broken down the highly powerful Ravana became ablaze 
as if burning down every thing with his unbearable ire 
And being possessed by wrath he began to make a downpour 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1478 



RAMA YANA. 



of shafts. Ravana then, with flaming arrows, pierced R&ma’s 
steeds. The celestial horses were not bewildered thereby 
nor their course was slackened. And they remained 
thoroughly unagitated as if they were stricken with lotus 
stalk3. Beholding the steeds thus unmoved Ravana was 
again exercised with w T rath and began to discharge afresh 
his various weapons — gadas, parighas , chakras and musalas, 
mountain tops, trees, darts and paraskus and thousands of 
other shafts by virtue of his illusive powers. And unmoved 
was his energy. And that downpour of various weapons 
became huge and terrible in the conflict creating terror and 
making a dreadful noise. Thereupon leaving aside Raghava’s 
car he began to assail the monkey-host and enveloped the 
sky with a continual discharge of arrows. The Ten-necked 
demon let loose many a weapon even at the risk of his own 
life. And beholding Ravana in the encounter thus actively 
engaged in the discharge of arrows, Kakuthstha, smiling, set 
up pointed shafts, and discharged them by hundreds and 
thousands. Beholding them Ravana again filled the welkin 
with arrows — and thus with shafts discharged by them botli 
another flaming sky was created. None (of the arrows) 
missed the aim, none of them failed to pierce another and 
none of them was fruitless. And the arrows discharged by 
Rama and Ravana stricking each other fell down on the 
earth. And they standing on their right and left began to 
make a continued downpour of arrows and enveloped'the 
sky entirely. And they opposing each other, Ravana slew 
Rama’s steeds and Rama in his turn slew Ravanan’s. They, 
thus enraged fought with each other and for sometime there 
ensued a terrible encounter capable of making ones 
down stand on end. And the highly powerful Ravana and 
Rama* fighting with each other in the conflict by means of 
sharpened arrows, the lord of Rakshasas beholding his 



* The epithet in the text is Lakshmana*s elder brother. 



Digitized by 




YUDDHA KA NDA M. 



1479 



flag staff broken down became enraged with the foremost of 
Raghus. 



SECTION CIX. 



U/AMA and Ravana thus opposing each other in battle, 
all the animals beheld them, stricken with astonishment. 
And those two great heroes, highly angered, began to dash 
towards and assail each other ; and being determined to 
slay each other they looked greatly dreadful. And their 
charioteers drove the cars on, displaying their skill by 
moving in circles, in rows and diverse other ways. And 
those two excellent heroes, discharging their shafts and 
influenced by illusions, assailed each other proceeding and 
receding, Rama attacking Ravana and Ravana withstanding 
him. And these two cars coursed the earth for sometime like 
clouds accompanied by showers. And displaying many a 
movement in the conflict they again stood facing each 
other, fTlie forepart of one car touching that of the other and 
the heads of the steeds touching each other ; and the pennons, 
stationed on one touched those of the other. Rama, with 
four sharpened arrows, shot off his bow, removed the.fiaming 
horses of Ravana to some distance. And finding his steeds 
thus removed he was exercised with wrath, And the 
Ten-necked one discharged sharpened arrows at RSghava. 
And he was pierced by those arrows coming from the 
powerful Ten-necked demon. He was neither overwhelmed 
nor pained therewith and he Again discharged arrows 
resembling the thunder-bolts. And the Ten-necked demon 
again discharged arrows at the charioteer, which fell with 
great vehemence on the person of Matali. Matali was not 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1480 



RAMA YANA. 



the least pained or overwhelmed in that encounter. And 
beholding his charioteer thus assailed jRama was excited with 
wrath and overwhelmed his foe with a net of arrows. VXnd 
the heroic Raghava showered on his enemy’s chariot shafts by 
t>ventys, thirtys, sixtys, hundreds and thousands. And the 
lord of Rakshasas, Ravana, who was stationed on the car, 
wroth, attacked RSma in the conflict with maces and 
Musalas . And there again ensued a terrible conflict,capable 
of making one’s down stand on end.j And the seven oceans 
were overwhelmed with the sound of maces, musalas, 
Parighas and gold feathered arrows. And those inhabiting 
the regions under the agitated oceans, all the Danavas and 
thousands of Pannagas were greatly pained. And greatly 
shook the earth with her mountains, Torests and gardens. 
The Sun was shorn of its resplendance and the wind blew 
very rough. ^Thereupon the celestials, with Gandhat'bas , 
Siddhas y great saints, Kinnarasjiv\<\ serpents, were all worked 
up with anxicty.J) ,And beholding the dreadful encounter 
between R5ma and Ravana aipable of making people’s down 
stand on end, jthe celestials with ascetics began to pray, — 
“May good betide the Brahmins, and cows, may people live 
in peace and may Raghava defeat Ravana, the lord of 
Rakshasas, in the conflict.” j And the crowd of Gandharbas 
and Apsaras beholding that wonderful battje between Rama 
and Ravana, said, — “The ocean resembleth the sky and the 
sky resembleth the oceanr— forsooth this encounter between 
Rama and Ravana befits^them only.” Thereupon R&ma of 
long-arms, the enhancer of the glory of Raghu’s race, enraged, 
set his arrow, resembling a serpent, on his bow, and cut 
assunder R&vana’s head wearing shinning Kundalas . And 
that head in the presence of the inhabitants of the three 
regions fell down on the earth. Instantly there arose 
another head resembling the former ; and it was speedily 
cut off by the light-handed Rama. As soon as the second 
head was chopped off in tlve encounter by means of shafts 



Digitized by v^ooQfe 




YUDDHA KA NDA M. 



1481 



another appeared again. And that was again severed by 
Rama’s shafts resembling thunder-bolts. And thus were 
severed hundred heads all equal in brilliance. But tho end 
of Ravana’s life was not seen by him. Thereupon the heroic 
RSghava, conversant with the use of all weapons, the enhancer 
of Kausalya's joy, began to reason within himself in various 
ways, — “Verily these are the arrows by which Maricha 
was killed, and Khara with Dushana was slain — Viradha was 
destroyed in the forest of Krauncha — the headless demon 
in the forest of Dandaka — Salas and mountains were broken 
—the ocean was agitated — and V&li was killed ; — I do not 
perceive the reason, why they are becoming fruitless when 
discharged at Ravana.” Thinking thus RSghava made himself 
ready in the conflict and began to shower arrows on RSvana’s 
breast. Thereupon Ravana too, the lord ofj Rakshasas, 
seated in a car and highly enraged, assailed Rama in the 
conflict with a downpour of maces and Musalas . That 

dreadful and huge conflict, capable of making hairs stand on 
end, continued for seven nights before the eyes of the 
celestials, Danavas, Yakshas, PisSchas, Uragas and serpents 
stationed in the sky, on the earth or on the mountain-tops. 
Neither for the night nor for the day, nor for a moment did 
the fight between Rama and R£vana cease. And beholding 
the conflict between Dasaratha’s son and the lord of 
RSkshasas, and Raghava’s victory, the high-souled charioteer 
of the lord of the celestials spake speedily unto Rama engaged 
in the conflict. 



1 86 



Digitized by L.OOQ le 




148s 



RAMA YANA . 



SECTION CX. 

Thereupon MStali, reminding him, spake unto Raghava— 
“Why dost thoq, O hero, as if not knowing, fear him ? Do 
thou, O lord, discharge at him the weapon obtained from the 
great Patriarch. The time for (his) destruction, as described 
by the celestials, hath arrived.” Being reminded by those 
words of Matali, R&ma took up the flaming shaft, breathing 
as if like a serpent. The great Rishi Agastya first conferred 
this upon him. This is a huge and dreadful shaft 
given by Brahma and highly useful in battle. It was 
made by BrahmSl of undecaying prowess for Indra and 
conferred by him upon the Lord of celestials desirous of 
acquiring victory. In its wings there is wind, in its head 
there is fire and the Sun, in its body there is the sky 
and in its weight there are the (hill) Meru and Mandara. 
It is resplendent by its own lustre, well feathered and 
adorned with gold— made of the essence of all objects and 
bright as the rays of the Sun. It is like the fire of 
dissolution enveloped in smoke — like the flaming serpent, 
capable of piercing men, serpents and horses and was 
swift-coursing. (It can) rend the gateways, Parighas 
and hills — is soaked in blood, dipped in marrow, and 
extremely dreadful. It is hard as the lightning — producing 
a dreadful sound, assailing various (divisions of the) army, 
creating terror unto all, dreadful and (as if) breathing like a 
serpent. It is terrible as the Death in the conflict and 
provides food always for the herons, vultures, cranes, 
jackals and the RSkshasas. It is the enhancer of the 
monkey-leaders* joy and the repressor of the Rakshasas and 
is feathered like unto a bird with many a picturesque wing. 
And the highly powerful Rama, consecrating in accordance 
with the mantras laid down in the Vedas, that huge shaft— 
the foremost of all in the world, removing the fear of the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



*483 



Ikshwaku race, destroying the fame of the enemies and 
conducing to the joy of its own party, set it on his bow. And 
that excellent arrow being mounted on his bow by RSghava 
all the animals were stricken with fear and the earth shook. 
And (Rama) highly enraged, and greatly wary, suppressing 
(his breath) discharged that shaft at RSvana — piercing to 
the vitals. (That BrahmS weapon) irrepressible as the 
thunder, dreadful as the Death and discharged by Rama, fell 
down on Ravana's breast. And that shaft, capable of 
bringing about death and gifted with velocity, when 
discharged, cleft the breast of the vicious-souled Ravana. 
And that body-ending arrow, bathed in blood, stealing away 
the life of R§vana } entered the earth. That shaft, slaying 
Ravana, soaked in blood and successful, again entered the 
quiver* humbly. And from his hand, who was deprived of 
his life, fell down instantly on earth his shafts and bow. 
And fell down on the earth from the chariot, the highly 
effulgent Ravana, gifted with dreadful velocity and shorn of 
his life. And beholding him thus fallen down, the remaining 
night-rangers, deprived of their lord and stricken with 
terror fled away to various quarters. And beholding the 
destruction of the Ten-necked (demon) and the victory of 
Raghava, the monkeys, fighting with trees, pursued them on 
all sides. And being assailed by the monkeys arid having 
their countenances full of tears in consequence of their lord 
being slain they fled away to Lanka in fear. Thereupon the 
monkeys being greatly delighted roared out the victory of 
Rama. The celestial bugle was sounded in the sky and 
there blew the excellent air carrying the celestial fragrance. 
Flowers were showered upon Rama's car which was 
covered therewith. The celestials in the sky began to 
chaunt the glory of Rlma and praise him. And Ravana, the 
dread of all people, being slain, the celestials with the 

♦ In some texts there is t, napunarabishat n i . e. did not enter the 
quiver. — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1484 



RaMA YANA . 



Charanas were greatly delighted. And slaying that foremost 
of the Rakshasas,Rama satisfied the desire of Sugriva, Angada 
and Bibhishana. Thereupon the celestials attained their 
peace, the quarters were delighted, the atmosphere was 
clear, calm air began to prevail all over the earth, and the 
Sun appeared in its full rays. Thereupon Sugriva, 
Bibhishana and Lakshmana, welcomed Rama, of unmitigated 
prowess, singing his glory. And there appeared beautiful 
-at the battle-field Rama of firm promise, slaying his enemy 
and encircled by his army and friends, like unto the Lord of 
the celestials surrounded by the gods. 



SECTION CXI. 



^Beholding his brother defeated, slain and lying down 
on the battle-field, Bibhishana, overpowered with the weight 
of his grief, began to lament — “O hero, well-known for thy 
prowess, wise and conversant with polity, thou wert used to 
excellent beds, why dost thou lie down on the earth, 
spreading (on the earth) thy long and actionless arms, 
always adorned with Angadas and being shorn of thy helmet 
having the resplendance of the Sun ? O hero, thou hast 
come by what I had anticipated and what did not please thee 
who wert possessed by delusions. Prahasta, Indrajit, 
Kumbhakarna, Atikaya, Atiratha, Narantaka, yourself and 
others — none of you paid heed, out of haughtines, to what I 
had said which hath now been brought about. Oh ! the 
bridge of the pious hath been broken, the figure of the virtue 
hath been spoiled, the refuge of the strong and powerful hath 
disappeared and thou hast attained to the state of the 
heroes ! The sun hath fallen down on the earth, the moon 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1485 

hath been shorn of its lustre, the fire hath been extinguished 
and virtue hath desisted from its action, this heroe, the 
foremost of those using weapons, falling down on the earth. 
O thou the foremost of the R&kshasas lying down in the dust 
on the battle field like one asleep, whom else have these 
remaining (Rakshasas) deprived of their power and energy, 
got ? The huge tree, of the lord of Rakshasas, having 
patience for its leaves, velocity for its flowers, the power 
of asceticism and heroism for its firm roots, hath been 
uprooted by the Rdghava wind. Mad-elephant-like RSvana, 
having prowess for its tusk, family rank for its back bone, 
anger for its legs, and delightedness for its trunk, hath been 
laid low on the ground by the lion of the Ikshwaku race. 
The powerful R&kshasa-fire, having prowess and energy for 
its rays, angry breath for its smoke, own strength for its 
power of burning, hath been extinguished in battle by Rama - 
like cloud. The R&kshasa bull ever defeating others and 
powerful as the wind, having Rakshasas for its tail, hump 
and horns, and fickleness for its ears and eyes, hath been 
slain to-day by Rdma-tiger” Hearing these words, pregnant 
with sound reasonings from Bibhishana and beholding him 
overwhelmed with grief Rama said, — “(This lord of 
Rakshasas) of dreadful prowess hath not been slain in battle 
disabled. He is gifted with great prowess and energy and 
devoid of the fear of death.* The heroes abiding by the 
virtues of the Kshatriyas, who fall at the battle field for 
enhancing their glory, when dead, should not be mourned 
for. This is not the time to mourn for him although 
possessed by death, by wdiom gifted with intellect, Indra 
with the three worlds was terrified in conflict. Besides 
success in battle is not perpetual ; either one slays his enemy 
or meets with his destruction at his hands in the conflict. 
This procedure of the Kshatryas was laid down by the 



* i. e . h€ has accidentally met with death. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





486 



RAM AY ANA 



ancient preceptors that a Kshatrya, when slain in battfe 
should not be mourned for. Beholding this to be certain 
and attaining calmness, do thou be freed from thy sorrow 
and think what should be done now. Thereupon 
Bibhishana stricken with grief addressed the powerful 
son of the king speaking thus with words tending to 
his brother's well-being. “Thou hast, like the ocean 
breaking down its banks, broken him down, who had not 
been ere this even defeated by B&sava and the celestials. By 
him were conferred many a gift on those who wanted them, 
were'enjoyed many a luxury, were maintained many a servant, 
distributed wealth unto friends and slain the enemies. He 
propitiated fire, performed great austerities, was conversant 
with the Vedas and the great performer of sacrifices. 1 desire 
to perform, by thy instructions, his becoming obsequies.” 
Being thus addressed by Bibhishana with piteous accents, 
the high-souled son of the lord of men, gifted with great 
energy, ordered him to perform his obsequies and said. “With 
death our enmity hath terminated and our object hath been 
accomplished : he is as dear unto me as unto thee : perform 
(therefore) his funeral rites." 



SECTION CXII. 



Beholding R£vana slain by the high-souled RSghava 
lUkshasees, stricken with grief, issued out of the inner 
appartments. Stricken with grief and with dishevelled hairs 
they rolled in the dust albeit prevented again and again like 
unto cows separated from their calves. And coming out by 
the northern gate along with the R&kshasas, entering the 
dreadful arena of battle and searching their slain lord the 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDA M. 



1487 



she-demons cried piteously — “O lord, O husband, O our 
all” and moved along the battle field soaked in blood and 
filled with headless corpses. With eyes full of tears and 
overwhelmed with the grief of their husband they began to 
move about like she-elephants without the lord of their herd. 
Thereupon they beheld there on the earth the huge-bodied 
and the highly powerful and effulgent R&vana slain like red 
collyrium. And beholding their* lord lying down on the 
battle-field they all fell on his body like creepers torn 
assunder. Some wept embracing him respectfully — some 
holding his feet and some placing themselves around his 
neck. And some taking up his hand rolled on the ground 
and some were beside themselves (with grief) beholding the 
slain (Ravana’s) countenance. And some placing her head 
on his lap, and beholding his face, wept, bathing it with tears 
like a lotus enveloped with snow. Seeing their husband* 
Havana thus slain on the earth, they stricken with grief, 
bewailing again and again in sorrow, wept profusely. He 
by whom the king Vaisr&bana was deprived of his flower 
car, who terrified the high-souled Gandharbas, ascetics and 
the celestials in battle field, who did not know of any 
fear from the Asuras, celestials and the Pannagas, hath now 
been overpowered by a man. He, whom the celestials, the 
D&navas and the Rakshas could not slay, hath been slain 
in conflict by a man walking on foot. He, who was incapable 
of being killed by the celestials, Yakshas and Asuras, hath 
met with death like one devoid of prowess at the hands of 
a mortal.” Speaking in this wise, the she-demons, over- 
powered with sorrow, wept and bewailed again and again 
(saying), — “Not hearing (the counsels) of thy friends, always 
pointing out thy welfare, thou didst bring Sit5 for thy 
destruction as well as that of the Rakshasas. Although thy 
brother Bibhishana addressed thee with words pregnant 
with thy welfare— thou, for thy own destruction, out of thy 
misgivingsi didst excite his anger and hast (now) seen (the 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




t 488 



R AMAYA N A. 



result thereof). Hadst thou returned SitS the daughter of 
the king of Mithila. to Rama, this mighty and dreadful 
disaster, destroying the very root, would not have befallen us. 
Rama’s desire would have been encompassed — his friends 
would have been successful (through Bibhishana)— we would 
not been widowed and our enemies would not have got 
their desires fulfilled. By thee, Si tSL was kept by force in 
captivity in a ruthless manner, and the RSkshasas, ourselves 
and thyself — all three equally have been slain. O foremost 
of the R§kshasas, forsooth this is not thy own folly — it is 
Accident that uniteth all things and it is Accident again 
that bringeth about destruction. O thou of huge arms — the 
destruction of the monkeys and the RSkshasas as well as 
that of thyself hath been brought about by Accident. When 
the course of accident is about to bring about result — wealth, 
desire, prowess or command — nothing is capable of with- 
standing it.” Thus wept piteously the wives of the lord of 
Rakshasas like unto so many she-elephants — rendered poorly, 
stricken with grief and with tears in their eyes. 



SECTION C-X III. 

- — :*i • ■■ n: — 

The foremost of the wives of the RSkshasa (king) 
bewailing piteously cast her looks poorly towards her 
husband. And beholding her Ten-necked husband slain by 
Rama of inconcievable actions Mandodari bewailed there 
piteously, — " O thou of huge arms ! O younger brother of 
Baishravana! Even Purandara feared to stand before thee 
when enraged. The great Rishis— the far-famed Gandharbas 
and the Chdranas , fled away to different quarters in thy fear. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YVDDHA KA ND A M. 



148* 

And then (how) hast thou been overpowered in battle by R&ma 
who is a mere man ? Why is it that thou art not ashamed 
of it, O king, O lord of the Rikshasas ? Conquering the 
three worlds with thy prowess thou didst attain thy glory; 
and it is unbearable, that a man, ranging in the forest, hath 
slain thee. Thou, who art capable of assuming shapes at 
wilt, hast been slain in conflict by R&ma, in the city of 
Lanki unapproachable by men. I do not believe that thy 
destruction, — who hadst always been crowned with success, 
before the forces, is work of Rama. (Methinks) Death 
(himself) came there in the shape of Rima and spread 
illusions unconsciously for thy destruction, O thou of great 
strength. Or thou hast been slain by Visava — (no) what 
power has he got to face thee in the conflict gifted with great 
strength, prowess and energy and an enemy of the celestials 
as thou art ? It is evident that the great ascetic Vishnu, 
having truth for his prowess — the soul of all beings, ever exist- 
ing, without beginning, middle or end, greater than the great, 
the Preserver of the Nature, holding conch, discus and club, 
having Sribatsa ' * on his breast, always beautiful, incapable 
of being conquered, without destruction, devoid of end, 
and the lord of all men, assuming this shape of a man and 
encircled by the celestials, assuming monkey shapes, hath 
for the behoof of mankind, slain (thee) the dreadful 
enemy of the gods with all (thy) family and RStkshasas. 
Subduing all thy passions, thou didst conquer the three 
worlds — remembering their grudge they have now over- 
powered thee. Rima is not a man since he slew at Janasthina 
thy brother Khara encircled by many a Rakshasa. We were 
sore-distressed when Hanuman, by his own prowess, entered 
the city of Lanki incapable of being approached even by the 
celestials. And I prevented thee from creating enmity with 

* A particular mark usually said to be a curl of hair on the breast of 
Vishnu . The emblem of the tenth jina or the mark above ascribed to Vishnu 
or Krishna . 

187 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





RAM AY AN A. 



1 490 

R&ghava, but thou didst not pay heed to my words ancf 
this is the result (thereof). O foremost of R&kshasas — O 
thou of a vicious understanding, for the destruction of thy 
wealth, thyself and thy relatives, thou didst suddenly cherish 
amour for Siti, greater than (even) Arundhuti and Rohini. 
Forsooth thou didst perpetrate an unbecoming deed by 
distressing the adorable Sit a ever devoted unto her lord, an 
earth* even unto Earth herself and a Sreef even unto Sree 
herself. And having brought in a false guise from the solitary 
forest the sorrowful and chaste Sita, having a blameless 
person, thou didst bring on the destruction of thy family. 
Thou didst fail to encompass thy desire for the company of 
Sita. But now, forsooth, O my lord, thou hast been burnt 
down by her devotion who is devoted unto her husband.} 
Thou wert not burnt down when thou didst captivate that 
middle-statured (damsel) whom fear all the celestials headed 
by Indra and Agni.\ O husband, (proper) time appearing 
the perpetrator gets the result of his vicious deeds : there 
is not the least doubt in this. The performer of the good 
receives good (result) — the perpetrator of the vicious (deeds) 
meets with bad (result). Bibhishana hath attained to happi- 
ness and thou hast met with this thy end. There are damsels 
in your seraglio far more beautiful than she but thou 
possessed by cupid couldst not perceive this. Maithilee is 
not my equal nor superior either in birth, beauty or accomplish- 
ments, but thou didst not perceive this by thy misgivings. 
Death doth not always visit all men without any cause — and 
Maithilee is the cause of thy death. And death, in consequence 
of Maithilee, hath taken thee far away. And she, shorn of 

* The Earth is an emblem of patience but Sita is more patient than the 
'Earth. — T. 

f Sree is the goddess of wealth and good fortune — but Sit& is more 
fortunate than fortune herself. — T. 

t i.e. that thou wert not burnt down there and then shows her greatness of 
mind.— T. $ The god of Fire. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDHAKA NDA M. 



M9* 



at! sorrow, shall enjoy in the company of R§ma, and I, of 
limited piety, am now sunk in the the ocean of grief. 
Roaming at large with thee in a car unequalled in beauty 
on the hill Kailua, Mandara, Maru, in the garden of Chaitra- 
ratha and all other celestial gardens, beholding many a 
country, wearing variegated clothes and garlands, I have 
been deprived of all pleasures and enjoyments, O hero, 
by thy death. And I am a widow now. O fie on 
fickle fortune ! O king, in lustre of countenance thou art 
like the Sun, in grace like the Moon, in beauty like the lotus ; 
thou art graceful, O thou having excellent brows ; thou hast 
got excellent skin, high nose and thy countenance is graced 
with a brilliant crown and Kundalas . Oh how beautiful, 
thou didst look with various garlands when thy eye 
whirled with intoxication on the drinking ground and how 
beautiful were thy smiles, O lord. Thy countenance doth not 
shine now — being severed with Rama's shafts, bathed in a 
pool of blood, having thy back-bone and brain deranged and 
covered with the dust raised by the wheels of the chariots. 
Alas! by my ill-luck I have attained to that after state 
making me a widow which I did never think of. My father 
is the king of Danavas, my husband the lord of Rakshasas, 
an<J my son the subduer of Sakra. I was greatly proud of 
this and always confident that my protectors were undaunted, 
dreadful, repressors of the enemies and famous for their strength 
and manliness. O ye foremost of the Rakshasas, how could 
this fear from man overwhelm you all who were so powerful ? 
(This thy body) is cool, green like Indraneela , high like 
a huge mountain, and adorned with Keyura % Angada, jewels 
and garlands of flowers. It was graceful in places of enjoy, 
ments and incapable pf being looked at in the field of battle. 
It was brilliant, being decked with ornaments like unto clouds 
accompanied by lightnings. And this thy person hath been 
pierced with shafts to-day ; (and knowing) that it is not 
easy of attainment for me I am incapable of embracing 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




RAMA YANA . 



1492 

(it), covered with shafts piercing through the very vitats. O 
king (this thy body) green-hued (but now) blood-red is now 
lying on the ground like unto a mountain shattered with 
thunder-bolts. That thou wouldst be slain by R£ma was 
like a dream, but it hath proved true 1 Thou wert like death 
unto Death himself, why hast thou been possessed by him 
then ? Thou wert the enjoyer of the three worlds* wealth 
and dread unto them ; thou wert the conqueror of the deities 
presiding over various quarters • thou didst shake Sankara 
(himself) — thou wert the subduer of the proud and thy 
prowess was well-known ; thou didst repress the people and 
slay many a pious man — thou didst, by thy prowess, use to 
give vent to haughty words before the enemies ; thou wert 
the maintainer of thy kinsmen and servants and the slayer 
of many perpetrating dreadful deeds ; thou wert the destroyer 
of thousands of celestials, Danavas and Yakshas ; thou wert 
the subbuer of Nivata Kavackas in the encounter ; thou 
didst hinder the performance of many sacrifices and wert the 
protector of thy relatives ; thou wert the obs true ter of pious 
observances, creator of illusions in conflict and thou didst 
bring away from hither and thither the daughters of the 
celestials, demons and men ; thou didst aggrieve the wives 
of thy enemies ; thou wert the leader of thy own men, the 
protector of the island of LankS and the performer of many 
a dreadful deed; thou didst confer upon us the enjoyment 
of many a pleasure — and wert the foremost of car-warriors. 
Beholding such a husband slain by Rama, 1 am, deprived 
of my dear lord, still maintaining my being; (forsooth) 
my heart is very hard. O lord of RSkshasas, used ere to 
many a valuable bed, why art thou sleeping on earth 
covered with dust \ When my son Indrajit was slain by 
Lakshmana in conflict I was greatly pained — but to-day I am 
slain. Deprived of my friends and relatives, separated from 
thee O my lord, deprived from the enjoyment of many pleasures 
1 shall lament for thee perpetually. Thou hast, O king, 



Digitized by 




YUDDHAKANDAM . 



M93 



reached the way, long and hard to be treaded — do thou take 
me, who am stricken with grief and who shall not be able 
to live without thee. Why dost thou wish to go leaving me 
behind who have been rendered poorly? Why dost thou 
not welcome me, unfortunate and poor, who am bewailing? 
Why art thou not angry, O lord, beholding me, having put off 
my veil, walk out on foot by the city-gate ? O beloved of thy 
wives, do thou behold thy wives— who have thrown off their 
veils. Why art thou not angry seeing them all come out (of 
the city)? I was thy companion in sports, O my lord ; I 
long for having thee; why art thou not consoling and 
welcoming me ? O king, being imprecated by those damsels, 
not one, devoted to their husbands, pious and ever engaged 
in attending upon their superiors, who had been widowed 
by thee, thou hast been overpowered by thy enemy. The 
curse, proceeding from them who had been ill-treated by thee, 
hath borne fruit. O king, the saying, that the tears of chaste 
damsels do not uselessly fall on the ground, hath been 
verified (here) forsooth. O king, conquering the worlds with 
thy prowess, how couldst thou, always honored by the king, 
cherish the vile desire of stealing away women ? Taking 
away R£ma and Lakshmana from the hermitage by an illusion* 
ary deer, thou didst steal away RSma's spouse. I remember 
to have never heard thee lament in battle. Forsooth, it is 
our misfortune and the sign of impending death (that thou 
didst do this) conversant as thou art with the past, present 
and future. Beholding the daughter of the king of Mithila 
brought (in the city of Lanka) what, thy younger brother 
Bibhishana, thinking and sighing, said, hath now proved 
true, O thou of long-arms. This destruction of the leading 
R&kshasas hath proceeded from the disaster arising from thy 
angerr and lust. For thy (vicious) deeds all our good fortune 
is i 0 gt— (and from them) hath proceeded the great disaster 
exterminating the race. And by thee all the RSkshasa families 
have been deprived of their lords. Thou, well-known for thy 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




*494 



RAMA YANA . 



strength and manliness, art not worthy of being grieved by 
me. On account of my effeminate nature my understand- 
ing is possessed by sorrow. Carrying thy pious and 

iniquitous deeds thou hast attained to thy own state-*— I am 
only lamenting for me who have been sorry for thy destruc- 
tion. O Ten-necked one, thou didst not hear the words 
of thy friends and brothers, who spoke' those well 
meaning words out of affection. Thou didst not obey the 
words uttered by Bibhisana, duly and mildly, pregnant with 
meaning and reasoning and tending to thy welfare. Madden- 
ed with thy own prowess thou didst not hear the words of 
M&richa, Kumbhakarna as well as those of my father— -and 
this is the result thereof. O thou resembling the red clouds* 
O thou wearing yellow cloth and excellent Angada t stretch- 
ing thy person on the gronnd why art thou in the long run 
bathed in blood ? Why dost thou not, like one asleep, welcome 
me who am stricken with grief ? Iam the grand-daughter 
of the highly powerful R5kshasa SumSli who never flies away 
from the field of battle : why dost thou not welcome me ? 
Rise up ! rise up ! why dost thou lie down (on this occasion 
of) new discomfiture ? To-day have the rays of the Suti 
entered fearlessly the city of LankSL. The Parigha, by which, 
brilliant as the rays of the Sun, thou didst distress the 
enemies in conflict, which was always adored by thee like the 
thunder of the wielder of thunder-bolt, which slew many in 
battle, and which was adorned with golden nets, now lieth 
shattered into thousand pieces by arrows. Why dost thou 
lie on the battle-field embracing her like your beloved 
spouse ? Why dost thou not* wish to welcome me like one 
not beloved unto thee ? Oh fie on this heart of mine which 
is not sundered into thousand (pieces) albeit distressed with 
the grief of thy death Bewailing thus, she, with profuse tears 
in her eyes, and with her heart overflowing with affection, 
became senseless. And being beside herself she flung herself 
on RSvana’s br east^ like unto the bright lightning appearing 



Digitized by 




YUDDHA KA N DA M. 



1 495 



on red evening clouds. Thereupon the other wives, of 
Rivana, greatly distressed and weeping, and rasing her up who 
was greatly weeping, began to console her saying : —“Dost 
thou not know, O worshipful dame, that the life of beings is 
very uncertain, and with adverse circumstances even the royal 
fortune becometh fickle ?” Being thus accosted she again 
wept aloud, bathing with tears her breast and beautiful 
countenance. In the meantime lUma said to Bibhisana,— 
“Do thou perform the funeral ceremonies of thy brother and 
console his wives.** Whereto the intelligent Bibhisana 
replied with the following words- — pointing out wealth and 
piety, and judging by Jiis understanding what is proper. “I do 
not think it proper to perform his cremation ceremony who 
had renounced all pious deeds, was wicked, cruel, liar and who 
had ravished others’ wives. He is my enemy in the shape 
of a brother ever engaged in doing injury unto others— 
and R&vana is not worthy of my adoration albeit he is 
adorable by virtue of his being my elder brother. O R&ma, 
perhaps people of this earth will call me cruel but they will 
again recognise my act as good when they will hear of 
his vicious deeds.” Hearing those words, Rima, the foremost 
of the pious and conversant with the skill of speech, 
greatly delighted, spoke unto Bibhishana (equally) skilled 
in speech,— “It behoveth me to encompass thy welfare 
since by thy help I have gained the victory. O lord of 
Rlkshasas, forsooth, thou shouldst heir my well-meaning 
words. Although this night-ranger perpetrated many vicious 
and impious deeds still lie was ever powerful, heroic and 
strong in warfare. I have heard that this high-souled R&vana, 
gifted with strength and a dread unto all people, was not 
defeated (even) by the celestials headed by the performer of 
hundred sacrifices. Enmity extendeth up to death — so it 
hath ended ; there is no necessity (of carrying it on). Do 
thou (therefore) perform his cremation ceremony — he is unto 
thee as he is unto me. O thou of long-arms it behoveth thee 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




RAMA YANA . 



1496 

to perform, speedily with due rites and religious ceremonies, 
his funeral ceremony — thou shalt be the object of praise 
(unto people).” Hearing the words of RSLghava, Bibhishana 
hastened on and began to make arrangements for the crema- 
tion of his slain brother RSvana. And entering the city of 
Lank£, Bibhishana, the lord of RSkshasas, speedily got out 
RSvana’s Agnihotra; * carts, brass utensils, fire, (and brought) 
Jajakas.1i sandal-wood, other woods, essences, Agura , other 
fragrant substances, precious stones, pearls and corals. 
Thereupon arriving immediately accompanied by R&kshasas 
and Malyav&na he engaged in the performance of cremation 
ceremony. Thereupon the twice-born ones, with tears in 
their eyes, covered the Rakshasa-king Rlvana’s body, with 
a silken cloth and placed it on a golden celestial litter. With 
the sound of various bugles they began to chaunt his praise. 
And taking up this litter adorned with various charming 
paintings and flags and carrying fire woods, all the 
R&kshasas headed by Bibhishana proceeded towards the 
South. £ The Brahmins, versed in Yayur Veda and with burn- 
ing fire in their hands, proceeded and were followed by the 
attendants. And the damsels of the seraglio followed 
speedily leaping (being ever unused to walking). And 
placing R£vana on the cremation ground, they, greatly 
stricken with grief, prepared the funeral pyre according 
to due rites with sandal -woods, Padmakas,\ U shir as || and 
sandal and spread an antelope-skin thereon. They (then) 
performed the excellent obsequies of the manes of the lord 
of R£kshasas. And raising an altar at the south-east corner 
they placed fire at the proper place. They then poured curd 
and clarified butter upon (RSvana's) shoulders. And placing 



* A pot for preserving sacred fire, 
f The Brahmins who perform obsequies. 

X Cremation-place. 

$ A sort of drug commonly called Padmakas . 
II The root of a fragrant grass. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDHA KANDA M. 



1497 



Sakata on his legs, Ulukhala* on his thighs, and the brass 
untensils, Arunis and Musals in their proper places, they 
celebrated (the obsequies of his manes). Thereupon slaying 
beasts according to the rites laid down in Sdstras and* 
pointed out by the great saints, the lUkshasas (made a 
coverlet dipped in their marrow and clarified butter) and 
placed it on the face of the lord of Rakshasas. And decking 
R£vana with fragrant garlands and various clothes, the friends, 
of Bibhishana, with depressed heart and tears in their eyes, 
showered dried paddy (on his person). And Bibhishana 
according to due rites put fire to his (funeral pyre). Bathing 
and with wetted cloth, offering duly linseed and sacrificial 
grass mixed with water and consoling (Rivana's) wives again 
and again, he entreated them to go back. They then entered 
the city. And those damsels having entered the city, 
Bibhishana, the lord of Rakshasas, approaching Rama, stood 
by his side gently. And Rama too, along with his army, 
Sugriva and Lakshmana, was greatly delighted after slaying 
his enemy like unto the wielder of thunder-bolt after slaying 
(the demon) Vitra. Thereupon leaving aside his bow with 
arrows, and the huge armour conferred by Mahendra and 
renouncing ire after the destruction of his enemy Rama 
assumed gentle mein. 



SECTION CXIV. 



Beholding the destruction of Havana the celestials, 
Gandharbas and Danavas ascending their respective cars 
went away chanting this excellent theme. And talking 
of Havana’s dreadful destruction, Raghava’s prowess, the 

* A wooden mortar used for cleaning rice. 

188 



Digitized by 



Google 




1498 



KAMA YANA . 



excellent warfare of the monkeys, the counsels of Sugriva, 
the devotion and prowess of the Wind-God's son and 
Lakshmana and Sita's devotion unto her husband, those high 
souled ones, delighted, repaired to their respective quarters. 
And Raghava, having long arms, permitting the charioteer to 
take back the celestial car bright as the sky sent by Indra, 
honoured him greatly. And being commanded by Raghava 
Matali, the charioteer of Sakra taking the celestial car, 
rose up in the welkin. And that charioteer rising up into 
the celestial region, Raghava, the foremost of car-warriors, 
greatly delighted, embraced Sugriva. And embracing 
Sugriva, bowed unto by Lakshmana and worshipped by the 
monkey he repaired to the camp of his soldiers. Thereupon 
Kakuthsha spoke unto Lakshmana — the son of SumitrS. 
gifted with auspicious marks who was near him — “O gentle 
one, take this Bibhishana to the city of Lanka ever devoted 
and attached unto us, and who had done us good. This 
is my great desire that I may behold Bibhishana the younger 
brother of Ravana installed on the throne of Lanka ” Being 
thus addressed by the high-souled Raghava, the son of 
Sumitra, saying—' “So be it” and greatly delighted, brought 
a golden jar. And placing that jar at the hands of the lord 
of monkeys, that one, gifted with great energy, ordered them 
to bring water from the Ocean. And repairing speedily 
those excellent monkeys came back with water from the 
ocean. And taking that jar and placing him on an excellent 
seat Saumitri with that water sprinkled Bibhishana as king 
of Lankft in the presence of all the Rakshasas, at Rama’s 
command. And (Lakshmana) encircled by friends sprinkl- 
ing him according to rites laid down in the Vedas, all the 
Rakshasas, devoted unto him, his counsellors and the monkeys 
attaining incomparable delight, sang the glory of Rama. 
And beholding Bibhishana the lord of Rakshasas installed 
in the city of Lanka, Raghava along with Lakshmana 
attained to an excess of delight. And consoling his subjects 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKA NDAM. 



1499 



lie went to Rama. And the monkey citizens, delighted, 
brought him curd, fried grain, sweetmeats, fried paddy 
and flowers. And taking all those things indicating auspi- 
ciousness, he, irrepressible and gifted with energy, conferred 
them upon Righava and Lakshmana. And beholding 
Bibhishana crowned with prosperity and success, Rama 
accepted them all for his satisfaction. Thereupon Rama 
spoke* unto the heroic monkey Hanuman, resembling a 
a mountain and standing before him humbly with folded 
hands, saying — “O gentle one, obtaining permission from the 
king Bibhishana, do thou enter the city of Lanka and 
enquire after Maithili's welfare. Do thou, O foremost of 
monkeys, inform Vaidehi of the destruction of R&vana in 
conflict after communicating unto her mine health as well 
as that of Lakshmana and Sugriva. O lord of monkeys, it 
behoveth thee to return with the tidings of Vaidehi after 
informing her of this pleasant news. 



SECTION CXV. 



JOEING thus commanded, Hanuman, the son of Maruta*' 
worshipped of the night-rangers, entered the city of Lanka. 
Entering the city with Bibishana's permissiom, Hanuman, 
again permitted, entered the Briksha Vatika.* And entering ^ 
there duly, the monkey, who was already known to Sita,, 
espied her, having her person not cleansed, like Rohini, 
oppressed by Rahu, sitting at the foot of a tree, devoid of 
joy and encircled by she-demons. And approaching her and / 
bowing unto her, he stood there humbly and unmoved. And 
beholding the highly powerful Hanuman arrived there the 

* A garden in the city of LankcL — T. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1500 



RAM AY ANA. 



worshipful dame stood silent for sometime and then 
recognising him became greatly delighted. And beholding her 
gentle countenance, Hanuman, the best of monkeys, began 
to relate unto her what R£ma had said — “O Vaidehi, it is all 
well with Rama Sugriva and Lakshmana. He hath enquired 
after thy welfare. He hath accomplished his end subduing 
his enemies — and his enemy is slain. O worshipful dame, the 
powerful Ravana hath been slain by R§ma, helped by Bibhi- 
shana and accompanied by the monkeys and Lakshmana. 
I do relate unto thee this pleasant news, O worshipful dame ; I 
do again delight thee ; it is by thy grace, O thou conversant 
with piety, O Sita, victory hath been gained. Do thou be 
consoled and relieved of thy anxiety. The enemy Ravana 
hath been slain and the city of Lanka. hath been brought 
under submission. fR5ma said), — ‘For discomfitting thy 
enemy a bridge was constructed over the sea by me who 
was determined and who did not sleep (for days) and thus 
my promise hath been fulfilled. Do thou not be afraid for 
living in Ravana’s abode for I have placed at Bibhishana’s 
hands the sovereignty of Lanka. Do thou be consoled 
thinking as if that thou art living in thy own house. To 
behold thee, Bibhishana, delighted, shall soon proceed.” 
Being thus accosted the worshipful Sita, having a moon-like 
countenance, and her voice choked in delight, could not 
utter any thing. And beholding Sita incapable of replying 
the foremost of monkeys said, — “What art thou thinking of, 

0 worshipful dame ? Why art thou not welcoming me ?” 
Being thus addressed by Hanuman Sita, ever treading the 
paths of morality, greatly delighted, replied with words 
suppressed by tears. “Hearing this pleasant news concern- 
ing the victory of my husband— and being brought under 
the control of joy I am speechless for sometime. O monkey, 

1 do not perceive any such thing which I can confer 
upon thee, in return, for this pleasant news. I do dot see 
any such thing on this earth which can match thy pleasant 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1501 

tidings and bestowing which upon thee I may be happy. 
Silver, gold, or diverse jewels or the kingdom of the three 
worlds — nothing is a becoming return for thy speech.” Being 
thus addressed by Vaidehi the monkey replied — folding his 
hands with delight and stationed before Sita, — <# 0 blameless 
damsel, forsooth this excellent speech becometh thee, who is 
ever engaged in the welfare of thy husband and ever desirous 
of his victory. I do consider, O worshipful dame, these words 
of thine, far greater than the wealth, jewels or even the 
sovereignty over the celestials. Forsooth I have gained the 
kingdom of the celestials and other things since I have 
beheld RSma, slay his enemy, victorious and peaceful. 
Hearing those words of (Hanuman) Maithili the daughter 
of king Janaka spoke unto the Wind-god’s son far 
more excellent words — u Thou art capable of speaking 
words, chaste, pleasant and significant of eight sorts of 
knowledge. Thou art the praise-worthy son of the Wind- 
god and greatly virtuous ; strength, prowess, heroism, 
knowledge of Sastras , noble-mindedness, energy, forgiveness, 
patience, endurance, humility and many other excellent 
qualities crown thee.” Thereupon not being elated the least, 
he again, humbly folding his hands with delights and 
stationed before Sita, said — “If dost thou permit me I may 
slay all these she-demons who had tortured thee before, 
distressed thee in the forest of A$oka, stricken with grief of 
thy lord, and who are cruel, have grim eyes and who 
perpetrate always dreadful deeds. O worshipful dame, I 
have heard that these grim-visaged she-demons distressed 
thee greatly with harsh words at the command of RSvana. 
I desire to slay all these dreadful, crooked, ugly (she-demons) 
having fearful eyes, meting out unto them various punish- 
ments. I wish to slay all these she-demons, who had used 
harsh words and had always offended thee, stricking 
them with fists, fingers, arms, dreadful knee-joints, teeth, 
chopping off their ears and noses, and pulling them by their 



Digitized by 




1502 



RAMA YANA. 



hairs : do thou confer upon me this permission. O far 
famed lady, I shall slay them by these various means, by 
whom, dreadful as they are, thou hadst been distressed 
before.” Being thus addressed by HanumSn, she, ever kind 
unto the poor, thinking and meditating, said to him— 
“O foremost of monkeys, why art thou angry with these 
she-slaves, who subject as they are to the command of their 
lord, have done this in accordance with another's order. For 
my adverse fortune and vicious deeds perpetrated in another 
birth I have been subject to such a plight and been sufferings 
the consequence thereof. Do thou not speak thus, O thou of 
huge arms. Such is the course of Fortune. Forsooth by my 
ill-luck I have met with (this misfortune). I forgive, out 
of pity, all these she-servants of Ravana ; they used to torture 
me at the command of that Rakshasa. And he being slain 
they shall not repress me any longer, O son of the Wind- 
god. Do thou, O monkey, hear of a Sloka y related in a 
Purana and pregnant with religious import, which was 
uttered by a boar to a tiger. ‘No one taketh upon himself 
the iniquity of a perpetrator of vicious deeds. So it 
behoveth the pious crowned with an excellent character to 
observe the rules (of piety). So it is proper to show compas- 
sion even upon those who perpetrate crimes and are worthy 
of being slain. Who is there who doth not commit a 
crime? It is not proper to act cruelly even by- them who 
take delight in killing men, although they commit various 
iniquitous deeds.” Being thus addressed by SitS, HanumSn, 
skilled in speech, spoke unto the blameless Rama's spouse, 
saying — “Thou art the worthy spouse of R§ma, religiously 
wedded and crowned with many qualities. Permit me, 
O worshipful dame^ to proceed where Raghava is.” Being 
thus accosted by HanumSn, Vaidehi, the daughter of king 
Janaka, said, — “ I wish to see my lord, ever fond of those 
who are devoted unto him.” Hearing these words, the 
high-minded HanumSn, the son of Maruta, pleasing Maithili 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHA K A ND A M. 



>503 



saiJ — “Thou shalt behold R&ma, having a countenance like 
the full moon, with Lakshmana, surrounded by his friends 
and having his enemies slain as Sachi beholdeth Indra the 
king of the celestials.” Addressing these words unto Sita 
appearing like Sree herself the highly effulgent Hanum&n 
returned where R&ghava was. Thereupon Hanuman, the 
foremost of monkeys, related duly all what did the daughter 
of king Janaka say unto Raghava resembling the lord of the 
celestials. 



SECTION cx VI. 



Thereupon bowing unto R5ma, the foremost of bow- 
men, having eyes, resembling lotus-petals, the highly wise 
monkey said, — “It behoveth thee now to see Maithilee, 
stricken with grief for whom thou didst initiate all these 
works and the fruit whereof hath now been attained. Hearing 
of thy victory Maithilee, possessed by grief and having 
eyes full of tears, expressed her desire to see thee. And 
I was told by her, confident of her previous trust, with profuse 
tears in her eyes, — “I wish to see my husband.’ 1 Being 
addressed by Hanum&n, R&ma the foremost of the piou^ 
being bathed in tears, engaged instantly in meditation. 
Thereupon sighing hard and casting his looks upon 
the ground he spoke unto Bibhishana resembling clouds, 
who was near him. “Do thou speedily bring Sita, here 
— the daughter of the king of Mithila — bathed, sprinkled 
with celestial paste and adorned with celestial ornaments.” 
Being thus addressed by Rama, Bibhishana hastened on 
and entering the inner appartment sent information Unto 
Siti through the female attendants. And beholding the 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1504 



RAMAYANA. 



great Sit5, the graceful lord of Rakshasas — Bibhishana, 
humbly and placing his joined palms on his crown, said,— 
“O Vaidehi, may good betide thee 5 sprinkled with celestial 
paste and adorned with celestials ornaments do thou ascend 
this car; thy husband wisheth to see thee. ,, Being thus 
addressed Vaidehi replied unto Bibhishana,—' “O lord of 
Rakshasas, without bathing even I wish to see my husband . 11 
Hearing those words Bibhishana replied, — “It behoveth thee 
to do what thy lord Rama hath said.” Whereto the 
chaste Maithilee, regarding her husband as God and filled 
with devotion unto her husband, replied saying “So be 
it / 1 Thereupon placing Sit5, bathed, performing the due 
rites wearing valuable clothes and adorned with valuable 
ornaments, on a palanquin, carried by many a capable 
Rakshasa, brought her (unto R&ma). Thereupon approaching 
the high-souled Rlma, who, being informed of (Bibhishana’s 
approach) was engaged in meditation, Bibhishana bowing 
down and delighted communicated unto him the arrival of 
SitS. And hearing of her arrival who had lived long in 
the abode of the Rakshasa Raghava, the slayer of enemies 
attained (simultaneously) to anger, delight and depression. 
And considering Sita, who was in the palanquin, over- 
whelmed with grief, Raghava delighted addressed Bibhishana 
with the following words. “0 lord of Rakshasas, O gentle 
(king), O thou ever engaged in encompassing my success, 
do thou speedily bring Vaidehi nearer to me.” Hearing 
these words of Raghava, Bibhishana, conversant with piety 
speedily cleared (the people out of that place). And 
attendants with armours and head-dresses on and with cane 
and drums in their hands began to move about driving 
away the crowd thereform. And the crowds of bears, 
monkeys and Rakshasas being driven on all sides began to 
fly at a distance. And they being thus driven there arose a 
huge noise resembling that of the ocean when agitated by 
the wind. Beholding the monkeys driven on all sides and 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YVDDHA KANDA M. 



150* 

troubled, R5ghava out of angler and compassion prevented 
him. And thereupon as if burning (every thing) with his 
angry eyes Rama addressed the highly intelligent Bibhishana 
with the following angry words — “Why dost thou insult me 
by destroying all these ? Do thou remove their anxiety — they 
<are all my own men. Neither the houses, clothes, walls nor 
reception like these are the veils of women. There is np 
sin consequent upon seeing women in danger, difficulty, war, 
Svyamhdra* sacrifice and marriage. She is now in great 
danger and difficult y— -there is no sin in seeing her specially 
in my presence. Therefore leaving behind the palanquin 
let her come here on foot and let the monkeys behold 
Vaidehi in my presence.” Being thus addressed by Rama, 
Bibhishana, being sorry, humbly brought Sita near him. There- 
upon hearing Rama’s accents, Lakshmana, Sugriva and the 
monkey Hanuman were greatly sorry. As if hiding herself 
in her own person in shame Maithili, following Bibhishana, 
approached her husband. And she, having a gentle 
countenance and always regarding her husband as her god, 
fixed her looks upon her lord’s face out of surprise, joy and 
love. And beholding the gentle countenance of her dearest 
lord, resembling the full moon she removed her mental 
distress. Thereupon she appeared (beautiful) having the 
countenance of the clear moon. 

? It is a form of marriage in which the bride selects » bridegroom for 

fiersejf. 



189 



Digitized, by boogie 




RAMA YANA. 



1506 



SECTION CXVII. 



T^eholding Maithili standing humbly by him, Rama 
began to give vent to his pent-up feelings— “O gentle one, 
destroying all the enemies in the arena of battle I have 
subdued thy enemy — I have done all that can be accomplished 
by manliness. I have reached the other end of my anger, 
rubbed off (the insult) for my spouse being taken away by the 
enemy and have killed simultaneously my disgrace and 
enemy. My manliness hath been displayed to-day, my labour 
hath been crowned with success and to-day I have fulfilled 
my promise by my own prowess. That accidental misfortune, 
under the influence whereof thou wert carried away by the 
fickle-minded R&kshasa in my absence, hath been subdued 
to-day by me, a man. What is the use of his manliness, 
who when insulted, cannot remove it ? Even if he be a great 
man he may be called mean. The praise-worthy works of 
Hanum&n — the crossing of the deep and the devastation of 
Lank&, have been crowned with success to-day. The labour 
of Sugriva with his army, who displayed valour in the 
encounter and gave me good counsels, hath borne fruit 
to-day. To-day also the labour of Bibhishana hath borne 
fruit— who renouncing his brother, devoid of all good 
qualities, came to my side. 11 Hearing those words of Rama, 
Sita began to look wistfully like a hind, with eyes full of tears. 
And beholding his beloved spouse near him and afraid of 
popular ignominy his heart was broken into two. Thereupon 
he spoke unto the exquisitely beautiful Sita, in the midst 
of the monkeys and Rakshasas, having eyes resembling lotus- 
petals and black and curling hairs, saying, — “As the southern 
quarter, incapable of being got at by the people, was 
conquered by the self-controlled great ascetic Agastya, so 



Digitized by L-ooQle 



YUD DHAKA NDA M. 



1507 

for thee slaying RSvana, I, (always) anxious to have honour, 
have removed my insult — as is the duty of a man. May 
good betide thee — do thou know that all my labour, in the 
battle-field, backed by the prowess of my friends, is for thee. 
To uphold the dignity of my well-known family, to remove 
the ignominy consequent upon thy being stolen away as well 
as to wipe off my own insult I have encompassed this. I 
have suspected thy character ; thou, (therefore) standing 
before me, art distressing me like unto a lamp before one who 
is subject to an eye-desease. Do thou therefore proceed, 

0 daughter of king Janaka, wherever thou likest to one of 
these ten quarters. I permit thee, O gentle one. I have 
nothing to do with thee. What powerful man, born in a 
high family, take back his wife considering her as friend 
out of lust, who hath lived long in another's house ? Thou 
wert taken by RSvana on his lap, beheld by him with sinful 
eyes ; how can I, taking thee back, bring disgrace upon my 
great family ? -The object, with which I have gained thee 
back, hath beeft accomplished. I have got no attachment 
for thee — do thou go wherever thou wishest, O gentle one. 

1 speak these unto thee impelled by my sense of duty. If 
thou wishest thou mayest live with Lakshmana, Bharata or 
Satrughna or with Sugriva or RSkshasa Bibhishana. Do 
thou settle, O Sill, where you may find thy own pleasure. 
O SitS, (I do not think) RSvana hath overlooked thee, who 
lived in his house, beholding thee so graceful and beautiful." 
Thereupon hearing those unpleasant words from her beloved 
{husband) SitS, always sensitive and who had never heard 
such unpleasant words, trembling like a creeper torn by the 
trunk of an elephant,began to weep shedding tears profusely. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




RAMA YANA . 



1 50# 



SECTION c x v 1 1 1 . 



' JOEING thus addressed by Rslghava, enraged; with those 
harsh words Sita was greatly pained. And hearing those 
words of her lord, unheard of, before the great assembly 
Maithili was greatly humiliated with shame. As if entering 
unto her own person (with shame) and greatly pained with 
these arrow-like words the daughter of king Janaka began to 
shed tears. Thereupon wiping the tears off her countenance, 
she with sorrowful words, addressed her husband — “Why 
dost thou, O hero, like a common man addressing an ordinary 
woman, make me heat these harsh and unbecoming words 
painful unto ears ? O thoii of long arms, I am not what thou 
hast taken me to be. Do thou believe me — I do swear by 
my own character. Seeing the otdiftary women thou art 
distrusting the whole sex. Do thou renounce this suspicion 
since thou hast tried me. O lord, though my person was 
touched by another — but it was not in my power ; nor was it 
an wilful act (of mine) ; accident is to blame in this, ftly 
heart is Under my control and that is in thee ; — and what 
could I do of my body which was subject to another and of 
which I was not the mistress. O thou the conferrer of 
honour — our affection towards one another was increased by 
6ur living continually for a long time ; even then if thou hast 
not been .able to Understand me I am ruined for ever. O 
king, when the great hero HanumStn was despatched by thee 
to Lanket to see me why didst thou not renounce me then ? 
Hadst thou deputed the monkey with that message I would 
have renounced my life there and then, O hero. Thou 
wouldst not have been required to undergo this toil at the 
risk of thy own life and giving unnecessary trouble to thy 
friends. O foremost of kings, being subject to ire — thou 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



509 



dost not perceive anything but womanhood in me, like an 
ordinary man. Although I am known to have a father but in 
fact I am born of the earth. Thou dost not sufficiently 
honour my character, O thou conversant with characters. 
Thy marriage with me in boyhood shall be disproved and 
thou art not sufficiently considering all my devotion and 
good conduct unto thee.” Saying thus with accents choked 
in tears and weeping Sita spoke unto Lakshmana, poorly 
and engaged in meditation. “Make a funeral pyre for me, 

0 Saumitri, that is the only remedy for this disaster. Being 
thus branded with an unfounded stigma I do not like to keep 
my life. To adopt the proper course for me who had been 
renounced before this assembly by tny disaffected husband 

1 shall enter this.” Being thus addressed by Vaidehi, 
Lakshmana, the slayer of enemies, .being possessed by anger, 
looked towards Raghava. And understanding Rama's 
intention by gestures ^and at his command the powerful 
Saumitri prepared a funeral pyre. None dared there request, 
speak with or even look at RSma like unto Death at the 
time of dissolution. Thereupon circumambulating R£ma, 
Standing With his head down, Vaidehi approached the burning 
fire. And bowing unto the celestials and BrShmanas, 
Maithili, with folded hands, spoke before the fire : — “As my 
heart hath never gone away from Raghava, may thou protect 
me, O fire, the witness of the people. As Raghava 
considereth me vile, who have got a pure character, may 
fire, the witness of the people, protect me on all .sides.” 
Saying this and going round the fire, Vaidehi, with undaunted 
heart, entered the flaming fire. The great assembly there, 
young and old, overwhelmed with grief, saw Maithili enter the 
flaming fire. And (Sita.) resembling the burning gold entered 
the flaming fire in the presence of all people. All beheld 
Sita, having expansive eyes, enter fire like unto a golden 
altar. The ascetics, celestials and Gandharbas saw that 
great damsel enter fire like unto a full oblation in the sacrifice. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1510 



RAMA YANA. 



And beholding her fallen into the fire- like unto Vasudhard , 
sanctified by Mantras in a sacrifice, all the females began to 
weep. And the three worlds — the celestials, Gandharbas 
and Danavas saw her fallen like unto a celestial from the 
heaven when imprecated. She having entered the fire, 
lamentations, unheard of before, rose from all sides from 
the R£kshasas and monkeys. 



S ECT 1 ON cxix. 



Hearing the lamentations (of the RSkshasas and 
monkeys) the virtuous-souled R£ma, with a poor heart and 
having his eyes full of tears, engaged in meditation for some 
time. Thereupon the king VaisrUvana, Yama with his 
progenitors, the thousand-eyed lord of the celestials, Varuna, ^ 
the lord of water, the three-eyed graceful MahSdeva — the / 
rider of bull, BrahmJl the creator of the world and the 
foremost of those conversant with the knowledge of Brahma 
—all these arriving at the city of LankS. in their cars bright 
as the rays of the sun, approached RSghava. Thereupon 
raising up their huge hands, decked with various ornaments 
and folding them 4 those foremost of the celestials said unto 
RSghava— -“O lord, thou art the preserver of all the worlds 
and the foremost of the wise, why dost thou neglect SitI 
entering into fire ? Why dost thou not understand thyself 
the foremost of the celestials ? Thou wart before the 
Patriarch of all Vasus * by the name of Kratadh&ma. And 
thou art thyself, 0 lord, the creator of the three worlds. 
Thou art the eighth of the Rudrasf and the fifth of the 

* A kind of demi-god of whom eight are enumerated. 

t A demi-god — an inferior manifestation of Siva : they are eleven ia 
number. 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1511 



Sddkyas ;* tlie A^winis are thy two ears and the sun and the 
moon are thy eyes. O slayer of enemies, thou appe^arest at 
the begining and the end of the creation. Why dost thou 
neglect Vaidehi like an ordinary man ?” Being thus 

addressed by the deities presiding over quarters, RSghava, 
the lord of people and the foremost of the pious, 
spoke unto those leading celestials, saying : — “I know 
myself to be man — R&ma, the son of Da9aratha. Let 
the great Patriarch tell me, who I am and whence I 
have come. n Thereupon Brahma, the foremost of those 
conversant with the knowledge of Brahma, spoke unto 
K&kutstha, who had spoken thus, saying, — “Do thou hear 
my true words, O thou having truth for thy prowess. O 
lord, thou art the great and effulgent, NSr&yana holding 
discus and mace ; thou art the boar having one tusk ; thou 
hast conquered the’past, present and future ; thou art undecay- 
ing and without end, O Rgghava ; thou art the great virtue 
of the pious — thou art the propounder of all laws and art four- 
armed ; thou art the holder of bow of time — the subduer of 
senses — the excellent Purusha (person), unconquerable by 
sins ; thou art Vishnu holding dagger, Krishna and of 
incomparable strength ; thou art the army, the minister — the 
universe — the understanding, forgiveness and control of 
passions; thou art the creation and destruction ; Upendra and 
the slayer of ( demon ) Madhu ; thou art the creator of 
Indra ; thou art Mahendra ; thou hast a lotus-like navel and 
thou art the slayer of enemies. The celestials and the great 
saints style thee as the refuge of those who seek for 
shelter. Thou art the foremost of Vedas with its thousand 
branches and hundred regulations. Thou art thyself the 
creator of the three worlds, O lord. Thou art the refuge of 
the Siddhasf and Sddhyas , thou art the Purvaja,% the 

* An inferior deity or demi-god, one of a class of twelve. 

t Saints of accomplished piety. 

X Produced or appearing before creation. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




RAMAYANA . 



1 5 ** 

sacrifice, Vashatkar ,* Owt and Paratpara.% No one -is 
conversant with thy birth and destruction — thou art manifest 
in all creatures — cows and Brahmins — in all quarters, in 
the sky, in the mountain, and in the river. Thou art gifted 
with thousand legs, thousand heads and thousand eyes. 
Thou dost uphold all creatures, the earth and all the 
mountains, Thou appearest like the great serpent in the 
water underneath the earth. O Rama, thou dost uphold 
three creations— ?the celestials, the Gandharbas and the 
D&navas. O Rama — I am thy heart, the worshipful 
Swaraswati (Goddess of learning) is thy tongue and all other 
celestials, O lord, created by Brahm$ are thy down. The 
closing of thy eye is the night and the opeping is the day. 
The Vedas are significant of thy desire and the control 
thereof — none hath got independent existence but thee. The 
whole universe is thy body, the earth is thy patience, the 
fire is thy anger-r-the sun and the moon are thy delight ; 
thou hast got Sreebatsha (a peculiar curl of hair) j thou didst 
before tread the three worlds witty thy three foot steps ; 
thou didst get the dreadful Bali bound and make Mahendra 
king; Sit§. is Lakshmi and thou art Krishna and Vishnu 
the Preserver of people. For Rivana’s destruction thou hast 
assumed the human shape. Thou hast accomplished that 
work of ours, O thou the foremost of the pious. O Rama, 
Havana hath been sl^in; Do thou gq up t;o heaven delighted. 
Sure is thy godly energy and never goes for nothing thy 
prowess. O R&ma, never is fruitless thy view and the 
chanting of thy glory. And always successful shall be these 
persons on earth who shall be devoted unto thee. Those 



* Burnt offering, oblation with fire— -from the exclamation used on the 
occasion. 

t Om — the first term of the Mantra, Om or Omk&ra is well-known as a 
combination of letters invested by Hindi; mysticism with peculiar sanctity. 
i Greatest of the great. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YVDDHA KANDA M. 



*5i3 

who shall be devoted unto thee at one with Pur&na* and 
the excellent Purasha , t shall attain all their desires both in 
this world and the next. Those persons shall never be 
unsuccessful both in this world and the next who shall chant 
this theme — excellent, instinct with the knowledge of Brahma 
and describing the old history. 



SECTION CXX. 



Hearing those excellent words uttered by the great 
Patriarch rose up Bibhdinsu% with Vaidehi on his lap 
shaking the funeral pyre. With the daughter of the king 
Janaka, the receiver§ of sacrificial offerings, being incarnate, 
rose up. And carrying on his lap Vaidehi, wearing a red 
cloth, resembling the newly risen sun, adorned with 
ornaments of burning gold — having black curling hairs and 
decked with fresh garments, Bibh&basu gave her unto Rama. 
Thereupon the Deity of Fire, the witness of the people, 
spoke unto R5ma, saying — “O R&ma, here is thy Vaidehi— 
no sin hath visited her. Neither by words, mind,understanding 
nor eyes, she, good-natured and beautiful — hath deviated 
from thee who hath got a good character and is heroic. She 
was in the solitary forest separated from thee, poorly and 
having no control over herself and hence she was carried 
away by the Rakshasa Ravona having enough prowess in 
him. Although shut up in the inner appartment — well 
protected and guarded by the dreadful she-demons she had 

* A class of writings considered saered by the Hindus, 
f Great or supreme spirit—^PwrasAa meaning that which abides or is 
quiesent in body. 

t The Deity of Fire. 

$ Fire. 

190 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




, 5 I 4 



RAMA YANA . 



always her mind in thee and was devoted unto thee. 
Although tempted in many a way and remonstrated with 
she did not think of that RSkshasa in her inner mind. Her 
heart is pure and she is not spoiled with sin— do thou 
therefore take back Maithili. Do thou not speak other- 
wise — I do command thee.” Thereupon hearing those 
words — the virtuous-souled RSma, the foremost of those 
skilled in speech, with his eyes agitated with delight, 
meditated for sometime. Being thus addressed, the highly 
effulgent and intelligent R&ma, of unmitigated prowess — 
the foremost of the pious, spoke unto that best of celestials 
saying — “Beautiful (SitS) lived in the inner appartment of 
R&vana for a long time so she needs this purification in the 
presence of all people. If I would take the daughter of 
Janaka without purifying her, people would say that R&ma 
the son of king Da9aratha is lustful and ignorant of the 
morality of the people. I know it full w.ell that Maithili, 
the daughter of king Janaka, hath her mind devoted unto 
me and hath not given it to any one (else). As the ocean 
cannot go beyond its banks so R&vana could not approach 
her having expansive eyes protected by virtue of her own 
chastity. The greatly vicious-souled one could not even by 
his mind get Maithili, who was beyond his reach like unto 
the burning flame of fire. Her mind could not have been 
moved although she lived in the inner appartment of 
RSvana — she belongs to none else ; Sit& is mine as the rays 
belong to the Sun. Maithili — the daughter of Janaka hath 
been purified before the three worlds — So I am incapable 
of renouncing her as a self-controlled person cannot forsake 
his (own) reputation. It behoveth me to carry out the well- 
meaning words of you all — the lords of people who have 
spoken them out of affection. ,, Saying this, the victorious, 
highly powerful, well renowned RSghava, worthy of enjoying 
happiness, and having his praise chanted in consequence of 
his noble action, regaining his spouse, attained to happiness. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YVDDHAKA NDA M. 



i5<5 



SECTION CXXI. 



Hearing those excellent words uttered by R&ghava, 
Maheswara (Siva) spoke far more important words — n O 
thou having lotus-eyes, O thou having huge arms and a 
spacious breast, O thou the slayer of enemies, O thou the 
fore most of the pious— it is a good fortune that this hath 
been done by thee. It is by good fortune, O RSma, the 
dreadful and increasing darkness — the fear of all people 
—R?tvana, hath been removed by thee in the encounter. 
Consoling the poor Bharata and the famed Kau9aly&, 
beholding Kaikeyi and Sumitri the mother of Lakshmana, 
obtaining the kingdom of AyodhyS, pleasing all thy friends, 
establishing the prestige of thy family, O thou of great 
strength, performing horse-sacrifices, attaining fair fame and 
conferring riches upon the Brahmins do thou repair to 
heaven. This king Da9aratha stationed on the car is thy 
father. He was thy superior on this earth, O Kakutstha. 
Obtaining thee as his son, that graceful (king) hath 
repaired to the region of Indra. Do thou bow unto 
him with thy brother Lakshmana.” Hearing the words of 
Mahadeva, R&ghava, along with Lakshmana, bowed unto 
their father who was seated on the top of the car. He with 
Lakshmana beheld their father shining in his own effulgence 
and wearing an unsullied clothr Thereupon beholding his 
son dearer than his life, attaining great delight (in 
consequence thereof) placing him on his lap and embracing 
him with his arms, the great king Da 9 aratha, having long 
arms and seated on an excellent seat in the car, said— **1 
am now in heaven and am equal with the celestials, but 
without thee, O R&ma, I do not like it — this is true — I do 
swear by thee. O thou the foremost of those skilled ia 
speech, I have still in my mind the words which were uttered 



Digitized by L-ooQle 







RAMAYANA. 



by Kaikeyi for sending thee away to the woods. Beholding 
thee all well and embracing thee with Lakshmana I am now 
shorn of grief like unto the sun, devoid of dues. I have 
been emancipated, O my son, through thee — a good and 
high-souled son, as the virtuous-souled Brahm^na Kap5la 
was by Asthabakra. O gentle one, I have heard from the 
celestials, (that thou art) the excellent Purusha in the guise 
(of a man) for the destruction of Ravana. Blessed is 
Kau 9 al)S, O R§ma, who shall be greatly delighted, on 
beholding thee, the slayer of enemies, gone home from the 
forest. Blessed are those men, O Rama, who shall behold 
thee installed in the city as the king of the world. I wish 
to behold thee reconciled with Bharata, devoted powerful, 
pure and performing pious observances. O gentle one, thou 
hast spent fourteen years in the forest with Siti and 
Lakshmana. The term of thy exile is over — thy promise 
hath been fulfilled ; and slaying Ravana, in the conflict thou 
hast pleased the celestials. Thou hast performed a mighty 
deed and attained to excellent fame, O slayer of enemies ; 
and placed in charge of thy kingdom do thou with thy brothers 
attain a long life.” The king speaking thus Rama spoke 
unto him with folded hands saying, — “O thou conversant 
with piety, do thou be propitiated with Bharata and Kaikeyi. 
Thou didst imprecate Kaikeyi, saying, — “I renounce thee 
with thy son ,? — may not that dreadful curse visit her and 
her son.” Saying “so be it” unto RSma with folded hands and 
embracing Lakshmana the great king said to him : — “O thou 
conversant with piety and fame on this earth, thou shalt 
attain to heaven and excellent state there. O thou the 
enhancer of Sumitr&’s joy — do thou attend upon Rama ; 
may good betide tlvee ; Rima is ever engaged in the welfare 
of all beings. All these celestials headed by Indra, Siddhas 
and Great saints, bowing unto this high-souled and excellent 
Purisha, worship him. R3ma, the subduer of foes, is the 
Indescribable and .undecaying letter Brahma % which has been 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUD DHA KA N DA M. 



1517 



described (in the Vedas) as the heart and secret of the 
celestials. For serving him along with Sita, the daughter of 
king of Videha, thou hast attained piety and excellent fame.*’ 
Addressing Lalcshmana thus, the king spoke unto his 
daughter-in-law, who was standing before him with folded 
hands, saying : — “It doth not behove thee, O Vaidehi, to be 
enraged (with Rama) for renouncing thee ; for purifying 
thee this was done by him ever wishing thy welfare. What 
thou hast performed, O daughter, to establish the purity of 
thy character, is hard to perform. What thou hast done, 
shall glorify all other females. Though there is no necessity 
forgiving thee any instruction as regards thy duty towards 
thy husband-still I should say that he is thy great god.” 
Having thus instructed his two sons and Sita, he repaired, in 
his car, to the region of Indra. Having advised his two sons 
along with Sita, ascending the car, and shining in his 
effulgence, that excellent king, greatly delighted, repaired 
to the region of the king of celestials. 



SECTION cxxii. 



. L JaSARATHA having repaired, Mahendra greatly delighted 
spoke unto Raghava, stationed there with folded hands, 
saying ‘‘O Rama, O foremost of men, this our presence 
here, must not be fruitless, we are pleased — do thou ask for 
what thou wishest.” Being thus accosted by the high- 
souled Mahendra — delighted, Raghava spoke, with a pleased 
heart— “O lord of the celestials, O thou the foremost of those 
skilled in speech, if thou art propitiated with me, I shall pray 
for (my wished-for-object) ; do thou grant it. Let all these 
highly powerful monkeys, who have been despatched to the 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




I51S 



RAM A YANA . 



abode of Death, on my account, regaining their life, stand 
up. O thou the conferror of honour, I wish to see all those 
delighted monkeys, who were separated from their wives and 
children on my account. O Purandara, do thou revive all 
these heroic and powerful (monkeys) who did not care for 
death, and who worked hard and were distressed (for me). 
May all those, by thy favour, who were ever devoted unto me 
and did not care for death (even) regain their life — this is the 
boon I pray for. O conferror of honour, I wish to see all 
these monkeys, Golangulas and bears, pale and hurt, unheart 
and gifted with strength and prowess like before. Let there 
be flowers, fruits and roots, even out of season wherever 
these monkeys shall live — and let rivers there be full of clear 
water.” Hearing those words of the high-souled RSghava 
Mahendra replied with words instinct with delight — “O my 
boy, O foremost of the Raghus, mighty is the boon thou hast 
prayed for — my words shall never be falsified, so let them be 
be fulfilled. Let all those bears and Golangulas rise up who 
were slain in the conflict by R&kshasas and had their heads 
and arms severed. Let the monkeys gifted with their 
pristine strength and prowess rise up unhurt and healthy as 
if after the end of sleep. And being reconciled with their 
friends, relatives and kinsmen let them attain to excellent 
joy. O thou the weilder of a huge bow, all the trees shall be 
filled with flowers and fruits and all the rivers shall be filled 
with water even out of season (wherever they shall live).*' 
Thereupon all these leading moekeys who had their persons 
wounded but now healed up, rose up like those asleep. And 
all those monkeys were greatly wondered, saying, “What 
is it ?” And beholding K&kutstha of accomplished end and 
eulogizing R£ma and Lakshmana, all the celestials, greatly 
delighted, said,— “Do thou, O king, repair to Ayodhyi— 
despatch all the monkeys — console the famed Maithilee, 
ever devoted unto thee— behold thy brother Bharata observ- 
ing ascetic vows in consequence of thy grief— and the 



Digitized by 



Google 




3 UDDHAKANDAM. 



1 5*9 

high-souled Satrughna and all thy mothers, O slayer of foes. 
And being installed on the throne do thou conduce to the 
joy of all citizens. ,, Having thus addressed R&ma along 
with Lakshmana, the thousand-eyed Deity, delighted, went 
away along with the celestials, in their cars resembling the 
Sun (in brilliance). And saluting all the celestials, K&kutslha, 
with his brother Lakshmana, ordered the encampment of 
the army. Thereupon that famous and well-pleased huge army 
of the monkys protected by R&ma and Lakshmana, appeared 
resplendant on all sides like unto a night beautified with the 
rays of the Moon. 



SECTION CXXII I. 



Eama having spent that night happily and risen up the 
next morning, Bibhishana, chanting his victory, spoke unto 
that slayer of foes, with folded hands, saying “Here 
are various articles for bathing, pastes, clothes, ornaments, 
sandal and various excellent garlands. And here are 
present women having eyes like lotuses and conversant with 
the art of decking. Let them perform their duty, O 
R&ghava.” Being thus accosted KSkutstha replied unto 
Bibhishana, saying: — “Do thou invite all these monkeys 
beaded by Sugriva to bathe. The virtuous-souled Bharata, 
having huge arms and ever used to comforts, is greatly 
distressed on my account. Without Bharata the son of 
Kaikeyi, ever performing pious rites, I do not value bathing 
or these clothes and ornaments. Do thou so manage that 
we may go to the city of AyodhyS, spcedity. For difficult 
is the way leading to Ayodhya." Being thus accosted 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




1520 



RAMA YANA. 



Bibhishana relied unto KS-kutstha,— c< 0 son of the lord of 
earth, may good betide thee, I shall soon take thee to that 
city. The car Pushpaka resembling the Sun, belonging to 
my brother Kuvera, was brought by the powerful R&vana. 
O thou of unequalled prowess, that celestial and excellent 
car, going everywhere at will, since the destruction of 
R&vana in battle, is ready for thee. And that car resembling 
the cloud is in the city of Lanka, in which thou shalt, 
relieved of thy anxiety, repair to Ayodhyi. If I am worthy 
of being favoured by thee, if dost thou remember any 
accomplishment of mine — if thou hast any friendship for 
me, do thou, O wise one, wait here with thy brother 
Lakshmana and spouse Vaidehi till I accomplish all my 
desires by worshiping thee. And then thou shalt go (to 
AyodhyS) O Rama. I shall worship thee with great delight 
and do thou, O R&ma, with thy friends and army, accept that 
adoration. O R5ma, out of love, Ivonor, and brotherly 
feeling, I do crave thy permission. I am a servant I cannot 
command thee.” Being thus addressed, R&ma replied unto 
Bibhishana in the presence of all the R&kshasas and 
monkeys, saying: — “I have been worshipyed by thee, O 
hero, with thy excellent counsels, with thy earnest endeavours 
and with thy great friendship. Do not think, O lord of 
R&kshasas, that I do not comply with thy request — my heart 
hastens me to behold my brother Bharata, who, to take me 
back, did come to the mount Chitrakuta, who laid low his 
crown at my feet and whose words I did not keep. (I am 
anxious to see) Kau£aly&, SumitrS, Kaikeyi, with my friends, 
citizens and villagers. Do thou regard me, O Bibhishana! 
O gentle one, as wnrshipped. O friend do thou be not 
angry — I request thee. Do thou speedily being the car for 
me, O lord of R&kshasas — my work is done-^-how can I wish 
to live here long.” Being thus addressed by R&ma, 
Bishishana the lord of R&kshasas, speedily brought the car 
resembling the Sun. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




YUDDHA K AND AM. 



T5?« 



'Thereupon arrived there the car adorned all over with 
•gdld paintings, altars crested with Baidurja jewels, 
having upper rooms, silvered all over, adorned with white 
(flags and flagstaffs, beautified with gilt lotuses, adorned 
with golden houses, covered with a network of girdles, 
having windows made of pearls and jems, girt on all 
^ides with a net of bells, giving forth melodious sound, 
resembling the summit of the mount Meru, constructed by 
VigwakarmA (the architect of -the celestials) adorned with huge 
apartments beautified with silver and pearls — having its 
base crested with crystal, containing excellent seats made 
of Baidurja , abounding in valuable coverlets and immense 
•wealth, incapable of being broken down and coursing at will. 
And communicating unto RSma (the arrival of that car) 
Bibhishana waited there. Beholding that flowery car, 
•coursing at will and resembling a huge mountain, R£ma, of 
a generous spirit, along with Saumitri, attained to an excess 
•of astonishment. 



SECTION C X X I V . 



Having brought that car Pushpaka> adorned with 
flowers and having stationed himself at a distance, Bibhishana 
the lord of R&kshasas, being incited to hurry on, humbly and 
with folded hands, spoke unto R&ma, saying, “What shall 
I do, O R&ghava V* Hearing those words the highly 
powerful Raghava, in the presence of Lakshmana, gave vent 
to the following accents out of affection — “All these 
•monkeys and bears have brought about the accomplishment 
of my work with great care. Do thou, satisfy them, O 
Bibhishana, with diverse jewels and riches. With these and 

191 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




i5*t 



RAMA YANA. 



thee, I conquered the city of LankS, O lord of ft&kshasas. 
They all fought with a delighted heart, having renounced 
all fear of life and who did never go away from the battle- 
field. Do thou, with a gift of riches and jewel, make good 
the work of these monkeys and bears who encompassed the 
accomplishment (of my end). Being honoured and delighted 
by thee grateful, all these leading monkeys shall repair (to 
their respective quarters). (If thou art found to be) 
sacrificing, self-controlled, compassionate and (the just) 
collector of revenues, all shall be attached unto thee. For 
this I do address you (thus). O lord of men, the soldiers, 
disgusted, renounce that king who is void of all royal 
accomplishments, and who uselessly slays soldiers in the 
conflict.” Being thus accosted by R&ma, Bibhishana, with 
a distribution of jewels and riches, honoured all those 
monkeys. And beholding all those leading monkeys 
worshipped with jewels and riches R&ma ascended that 
excellent car, taking the bashful, and high-minded Vaidehi 
on his lap and accompanied, by his powerful brother 
Lakshmana, a skilled bowman. And being stationed on the 
car K&kutstha honouring all the monkeys, the highly 
powerful Sugriva and Bibhishana, said — “O foremost of 
monkeys, ye have performed a friendly service — it hath 
been appreciated by me — do ye repair to your wished-for 
quarters. O Sugriva, thou, ever afraid of impiety, hast 
performed all that a loving and well-wishing friend should 
do. Do thou, encircled by thy army, proceed towards 
KishkindhS. Do thou, O Bibhishana, live in thy kingdom, 
Lank&, conferred upon thee, by me. Not even the celestials, 
headed by Indra shall be able to assail thee. I wish to return 
to AyodhyH, the'capital of^my father’s (kingdom). I wish to 
obtain your permission (and for this) I have invited you all.” 
Being thus addressed by R&ma, all the leading monkeys 
bears as well as the R2kshasa Bibhishana said with folded 
hands— ' We wish all to go to Ayodhyft. Do thou take us. 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




YUDDHA KA N DA M. 



*5*3 



We shall all range with delight at forests and gardens. 
Beholding thee installed and bowing unto Kau^alyS, we 
shall soon return to our respective homes, O foremost 
of kings.” Being thus accosted by the monkeys with 
Bibhishana, the virtuous-souled R&ma, spoke unto them 
and Sugriva and Bibhishana, saying — “Dearer than the 
dear, I shall attain to, when returning my city, along 
with you all, I shall enjoy in the company of all my 
friends and relatives. O Sugriva, do thou soon ascend 
the car along with the monkeys. Do thou ascend too, O 
Bibhishana, lord of Rikshasas, with all thy courtiers.” 
Thereupon ascended that celestial car Pushpaka , Sugriva, 
greatly delighted with the monkeys and Bibhishana, with 
his courtiers. And they all having got up, the excellent 
car, of Kuvera at the command of R&ghava, rose up in the 
welkin. And in that car coursing at will and drawn by 
effulgent ganders, Blma greatly delighted appeared like 
Kuvera (himself). And all the monkeys, bears and the 
highly powerful R&kshasas sat in that celestial car un- 
obstructed and at their pleasure. 



SECTION C X X V. 



Being commanded by Rama, that excellent car, drawn 
by ganders, with a huge noise, rose high up in the welkin. 
And casting his looks on all sides, R&ma, the descendant 
of Raghus, spake unto Sit5, the daughter of the king of 
Mithila, having a moon-like countenance, saying, — °0 
Vaidehi, do thou behold Lank&, situate on the suminit of 
the mount Chitrakuta, resembling that of Kaili^a and 
constructed by Vigwakarmd, And behold, O Sill, that 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




RAMA YAtfA 



i ' 5*4 

Huge arena of battle, bathed in the blood and flesh of the 
monkeys and Rakshasas. Do thou behold, O thou having 
expansive eyes, R&vana, the lord of R&kshasas, the repressor 
of people and who obtained a boon, lying there, slain by 
me on thy account. Kumbhakarna was slain there, the 
night-ranger Prahasta, as well, and DumrSksha, were slain by 
the monkey HanumSn. BtdyutmS^i was slain there by the 
high-souled Sushena — and Indrajit, the son of Ravana, wa» 
slain there* in the encounter, by Lakshmana. The K&kshasa 
named Bikata was slain there by Angada — and Birupaksha, 
hard to look at and Mahaparsha and Mahodara. And the 
powerful Akampana was slain (there) and aH other 
Jt&ksbasas — -TrisliirSL, AtikSya, Devan taka and Narantaka— - 
and the two leading and powerful Rakshasas, mad after 
conflict — the sons of Kumbhakarna — Nikumbha and Kumbha, 
Bajradanstra, Danstra and many other Rakshasas were slain 
and the irrepressible MakarSksha was slain (there) by me 
in the conflict. Akampana was slain — and the powerful 
Sonit&kshar And Yup&ksha and Prajangha were destroyed- 
(there) in the great conflict. The grim-visaged R&kshasa 
Viddutsjjmha was slain there — and Yajnasatru and the highly 
powerful Suptaghna. (And there was slain) Suryisatrt* 
and 1 Brah masatru. • (And there bewailed for Rivana) his 
spouse Mandodari, surrounded by his thousand other wives, 
O thou having an excellent countenance, do tbou behold 
the descending place of the ocean, where l spent the night 
after crossing the deep for thee. O thou having expansive 
eyes, for tlvee, this difficult construction of the bridge was 
made by me over the deep by the help of Nala. Do thotr, 
O Vaideln, behold the unagitated deep — the abode of Varuna, 
appearing as if without the other end, roaring and abounding 
in conchs and pearl oysters, O Maithilf, do thou behold the 
golden mount, which rose above the deep for affording a 
resting place unto HanumSn. And on the bank of this 
ocean I halted with my soldiers. And here Mah&deva, the 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




YUDDHAKA NDA M. 



* 5*5 



lord of the celestials, was propitiated with me. It behoveth 
thee to behold this descending place of the high-souled 
Ocean, known as Setubandha ,* worshipped of the three 
worlds, highly sacred and destroying even the worst sin. 
There, Bibhishana, .the king of Rakshasas first came 
to me. Do thou behold, O Sita, Kishkindha, having beautiful 
gardens, the pleasant city of Sugriva, where Vali was slain 
by me.” And beholding the city of Kishkindha, ruled over 
by VSLli, Sita, incited by her love, addressed Rima, with 
worthy words, saying — “O king, I wish to repair to AyodhyS 
thy capital with thee, in the company of Tara, the dear wife 
of Sugriva.as well as of the wives of other leading monkeys.” 
Being thus addressed by Vaidehi Raghava replied — saying, 
“this shall be done” and getting at Kishkindha he stopped 
the car. And having beheld the car stationed he 3poke unto 
Sugriva, saying — “O foremost of monkeys, do thou speak 
unto all the leading monkeys that they may go to Ayodhya 
accompanied by their wives. O thou of great strength— 
they may all go with Sita. Do thou hurry them on, O 
Sugriva. We shall (soon) go, O thou the lord of monkeys,” 
Being thus addressed by Rama, of unmitigated prowess — 
the beautiful lord of monkeys, encircled by them* entered 
speedily the inner apartment and beholding Tara there, 
said — ‘ O dear, at the command of Raghava and the kind 
desire of Sita, do thou soon go, taking with thee the wives 
of all the high-souled monkeys. We shall see Ayodhya and 
the wives of Da^aratha.” Hearing the words of Sugriva, 
Tara, having a pecfectly beautiful person, assembling all the 
wives of the monkeys, said — “You have been ordered by 
Sugriva to repair (to Ayodhya) with the monkeys ; — to behold 
Ayodhya, is also a dear object of mine. (“I shall behold) 

* This is still to be seen in the shape of a delapidated bridge near 
Rdmeswar a place of pilgrimage. Pilgrims go there Via Madura, a district 
in South Madras. The Raja of Ramnud in whose Zemindari it is situate is 
carlled Setupati. — T. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




1526 



RAMA YANA. 



RSma enter the city with the citizens and villagers and the* 
wealth and riches of the wives of Da^aratha.’ 1 Being thus 
commanded by T5rS,the wives of the monkeys, putting on alt 
their ornaments and circumambulating (her) ascended the car r 
with a view to behold Sit3. And beholding the car going 
up with them all, RSghava again spoke unto Sita, near the 
mount Rishyamuka, saying, — “Do thou behold there, O Sita, 
the huge and foremost mount Rishyamuka abounding in* 
gold and various metals, like unto clouds accompanied with 
lightnings. There 1 was joined by Sugriva, the lord of 
monkeys. And there I entered into an agreement, O Sits, 
for the destruction of Vali. And there is (the lake) PampSr 
abounding in lilies and skirted by picturesque forest where- 
separated from thee, I bewailed piteously. And on its bank 
I beheld the pious Savari . And there 1 slew Kavandha and 
Yoyanavahu . Behold there, O Sita, a beautiful tree, in- 
Janasth&na, where, O thou ever used to luxuries, for thee, 
the highly powerful and energetic YatSyu, the foremost of 
birds, was slain by Rivana. Do thou behold there, O thou- 
of a beautiful person, O thou of auspicious looks, our 
hermitage and the beautiful cottage of leaves, wherefronv 
thou hadst been carried away by force by the lord of 
RSkshasas. Do thou behold there the beautiful and sacred river 
Godaveri having clear water and the hermitage of Agastya, 
surrounded by plantain trees. Do thou behold there,. 
O Vaidehi, the great hermitage of Sarabhanga , where came 
the thousand-eyed, Sakra, the subduer of enemies’ cities^ 
O worshipful dame, O thou having a middle stature — amongst 
all those ascetics, thou beholdest, there lived Atri, the lord of 
our family — resembling the fire of the Sun. There was slain* 
the huge-bodied BirSdha by me. There thou didst behold, 
O Sita, the female astectic (the wife of Attri) ever performing 
pious observances. There cometh in view, O thou having 
a beautiful person, the king of mountains, Chitrakuta, where 
to propitiate me, came the son of SumitrS. Behold the 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




3 UDD HA KA NBA M. 



1527 



beautiful Yamuna, having picturesque forest on its bank and 
the pleasant hermitage of Varadwftya. Behold there the 
sacred river Ganges, dividing itself into three branches. 
Behold there the city of Sringabera, where I made friendship 
with Guha. Behold there, O Sit5, the capital of my father. 
Do thou bow unto AyodhyS, O Vaidehi. ,, Thereupon all 
the monkeys and Rakshasas along with Bibhishana rose up 
delightedly and saw the city. Thereupon the monkeys and 
Rakshasas beheld the city abounding in white houses having 
spacious compartments, filled with elephants and horses and 
looking like Amaravati, the capital of Mahendra. 



SECTION CXXV1. 

- — ^ Q ■ 

Having completed the fourteen years (of exile), the self- 
controlled elder brother of Lakshmana, arriving at the 
hermitage of Varadwlya on the fifth day, saluted the ascetic. 
And bowing unto Varadwaya, having asceticism for his 
wealth, he said,— 1 “O thou gifted with six sorts of wealth, 
hast thou heard of the prosperity and well being (of my 
city)? Is Bharata still engaged (in guarding the people) ? 
Are my mothers living ?” Being thus addressed by R&ma the 
great ascetic VaradwSya replied, delighted, and smiling, 
unto that foremost of Raghus, — “Abiding by thy command 
and with matted locks, Bharata is waiting for thee, always 
honoring thy sandals. And all others are well in thy house. 
O subduer of thy enemies, I was greatly pained, when I saw 
thee before entering the huge forest, wearing bark, three 
with thy wife,* deprived of thy kingdom for piety only, 

* i.e. thyself, Lakshmana and Sitd. 



Digitized by L-ooQle 





1528 



RAMA YANA . 



walking on foot, renouncing every thing, obeying th« 
command of thy sire, deprived of all comforts, like a celestial 
banished from heaven, deprived of thy kingdom at the 
words of Kaikeyi, and living on wild roots and fruits $ but 
beholding thee now of accomplished end, with all thy 
friends having vanquished the enemy, I have attained to 
highest delight. O R&ghava, I am apprised of immense 
griefs and happinesses which befell thee when thou didst 
live in Janasth&na. Thy blameless spouse was carried away 
stealthily by R&vana engaged as thou wert in the behoof 
of the Br5hmanas,and in the protection of all the ascetics. The 
view of MSricha — the carrying away of Sit&, — the beholding 
of the headless demon, — thy going to (the lake) PampSL,— 
thy friendship with Sugriva, where VSLli was slain by thee, — 
the enquiry of Vaidehi undertaken by the son of Wind-god, — 
the construction of the bridge by Nala after the whereabouts 
of Vaidehi had been known — the conflagration of Lank& by 
the delighted and the leading monkeys — the destruction, in the 
conflict, of Havana proud of his own strength, along with 
his sons, friends, courtiers, army and steeds — the arrival of 
the celestials on the destruction of Havana, the thorn of 
gods and the grant of boon by them— -I have known all these 
by virtue of my asceticism, G thou fond of virtue. My 
flisciples used t© go hence to that city to bring tidings, I 
shall even* now grant thee a boon, O foremost of those using 
weapons. Do thou accept my Arghya* and then repair 
to AyodhySL to-morrow.” And respectfully abiding by his 
words, that effulgent son of the king, delighted, begged of 
him the boon. “O thou gifted with six qualities, on my way 
while proceeding to AyodhyS, let all the trees, bearing fruits 
out of season, and producing honey, bear many a nectar-smelling 
•fruit.” No sooner he replied saying, — “Thy promise shall be 
fulfilled” than all the trees there became like those of heaven. 

* A respectful oblation to gods or venerable men of rice, duroa grass, 
dowers &c with water in a small boat-shaped vessel. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 





YUDDHAKANDAM. 



152$ 

Trees without fruits were filled therewith and trees 
without flowers were covered with them. AH the trees, 
whose leaves were dried up, were enveloped with foliage 
and all of them began to pour honey. The way to Ayodhya 
for three Yoyanas was thus filled all over (with trees). There- 
upon thousands of monkeys, living, at pleasure and delightedly, 
-on various celestial fruits, thought as if they were in heaven. 



SECTION CXXVU. 



Thereupon beholding AjodhyS, R§ma, the descendant 
of Raghu, of light movements and desirous of affording 
delight unto others, thought of welcoming (them). Think- 
ing thus the intelligent and effulgent (Rama) cast his 
looks towards the monkeys and spoke unto HanumSn, 
saying, — “O foremost of monkeys, speedily reparing to 
Ayodhya do thou learn of the welfare of all people in the 
palace of the king. Arriving at the city of Sringavera, 
do thou communicate unto Guha, the king of Nishadhas * 
having the forest as his kingdon, my well-being, at my 
command. Hearing that I am hale and hearty and relieved 
of all troubles, Guha, my friend like my own self, shall attain 
to delight. And Guha, the lord of NishadhaSy delighted, 
shall inform thee of the way to Ayodhya and the well being 
of Bharata. Do thou ask of Bharata his well-being at my 
words, and communicate unto him my (arrival) with Laksh- 
mana and my spouse after having made good the vow 

* A low caste aboriginal Hindu corresponding to our Chandalas aiways 
living in the forest. The Raja of Ramnud in the district of Madurd in Madras 
traces his descent from this Guha. 

192 



Digitized by L^ooQle 




* 53 ° 



RAMA YANA . 



(of ray sire) — the carrying away of Sita by the powerful 
R&vana — the friendship with Sugriva and the destruction of 
Vftli in the conflict — the search of Maithili instituted by 
thee having got over the huge lord of rivers — the advance (of 
the monkeys) to the banks of the deep — the view of the 
ocean, the construction of the bridge — the destruction of 
R&vana, — the grant of boon by Mahendra, Brahma and Varuna 
—my meeting with my father by the favour pf Mahadeva. 
Do thou, O gentle one, communicate unto Bharata, my 
arrival here with the lord of Rakshasas and king of monkeys, 
(Tell him) ‘vanquishing his foes and attaining to excellent 
fame Rama hath arrived at. the gate of the city with his 
valiant friends, having satisfied the vow (of his sire).* Thou 
shouldst read the signs expressive of joy or sorrow that 
Bharata shall display on hearing this and infer therefrom 
his attitude towards me. Thou shouldst know, from the 
colour of his countenance, his looks and his words, all the 
movements and actions of Bharata. Whose mind doth not 
change obtaining such an ancestral kingdom, filled with all 
prosperity and abounding in elephants, horses and'chariots ? 
If the effulgent Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, ruling 
over it, wisheth the kingdom for himself, let him lord over 
the entire earth. Therefore, O monkey, it behoveth thee to 
come back speedily apprised of his intention and movements, 
before we proceed further.” Being thus commanded, 
Hanuman, the son of Wind-god, assuming a human shape 
speedily proceeded towards Ayodhya. Hanuman the son of 
Maruta rose up in the welkin with velocity like unto Garuda 
ready to fall upon a huge serpent. Then crossing the Wind- 
path and the abode of the birds, getting over the terrible 
confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna, reaching the city of 
Sringavera and meeting Guha, the energetic Hanuman, 
delighted , (addressed him) with the following excellent 
words — “Thy friend Rama, the descendant of Kakutstha, 
having truth for his prowess, with Sita and son of Sumitra, 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHA KAN DA M. 



hath enquired of thy welfare. Having spent five nights* 
till to-day, he, having obtained permission from the ascetic 
Varadwaja shall proceed to-morrow.” Having said this the 
highly energetic monkey, not caring for the exhaustion of 
travel, greatly delighted and with hairs erect, rose up with 
great velocity. Beholding the holy river sanctified with the 
name of ParasurSma, the rivers— B&lufeini, Baruthi, Gomati, 
the huge forest of Sala trees, the various countries populated 
with thousands of people, and proceeding a great distance 
speedily, that foremost of monkeys got at the trees near 
Nandigr&m\ like unto those of Chaitraratha, the garden of 
the lord of celestials the flowers whereof were being plucked 
off by many a damsel accompanied by their children decked 
in various ornaments. He saw at a distance of one crosa 
from Ayodhya Bharata wearing the skin of an antelope, 
poorly, greatly reduced, living in a hermitage, wearing matted 
hairs, having his body covered with dirt, greatly pulled down 
in consequence of his brother’s disaster, living on roots and 
fruits, self-controlled, living the life of an ascetic, observing 
pious observances, with a bundle of clotted hairs on his 
head, wearing bark and deer skin, having control over his 
passions and senses, effulgent like Brahmarshis, ruling the 
earth always placing the sandals before him, protecting 
people of four Varnas against all fear, with courtiers, priests 
leading a holy life and soldiers all wearing red clothes ; around 
him. All those citizens, fond of piety, did not like to use 
good clothes beholding the prince use bark and deer skin. 
Thereupon Hanum&n, the son of Maruta spake with folded 
hands unto him, conversant with piety like virtue incarnate, 
saying — “K&kutstha, living in the forest of Dandaka with 
bark and matted hairs, for whom thou art lamenting, hath 

* Having spent five nights after the expiry of fourteen years of exile he is 
living at the hermitage of Varadwdja. He shall leave that place to- 
morrow. — T. 

f The country of Bharata’s maternal uncle — T. 



Digitized by t^ooQie 




* 53 * 



RAMA YANA . 



enquired after thy welfare. Do thou, O worshipful sire* 
speak out thy welfare and renounce the dreadful grief. 
Thou shalt in this moment be reconciled to thy brother 
Rama. Slaying Ravana, and regaining Maithili, Rama, 
having accomplished his end, hath arrived here with his 
valiant friends. The highly effulgent Lakshmana and the 
famed Vaidehi (have also come). Sita fareth well with 
RStma like unto Sachi in the company of Mahendra.” 
Being thus addressed by Hanum^n, Bharata, the son of 
Kaikeyi, delighted, fell down all on a sudden in a swoon of 
joy. Thereupon rising up in no time, and welcoming him > 
Bharata, the descendant of Raghu, spake unto Hanum&n 
communicating the pleasant tidings, the following words,* 
And embracing the monkey respectfully the graceful Bharata 
sprinkled him with profuse tears not out of grief but of 
joy. He said, — “Art thou a man or god who hast kindly 
come here? O gentle one, I shall confer upon thee, who 
hast communicated unto me this pleasant tidings, hundreds 
and thousands of kine, hundreds of prosperous villages, 
sixten young wives, pious, wearing excellent Kundalas , , 
golden-hued, having beautiful noses and breast, having moon- 
like countenances, decked with all ornaments and born of 
respectable families.” And hearing from that leading monkey 
of that wonderful return of Rama, the son of the king, 
delighted became anxious to behold him and again addressed 
joyously Hanum&n with the following words. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




3 UDDHAKANDAM . 



1 533 



SECTION CXXVI II. 

X HEAR the tidings of my brother affording me great 
delight who hath been living in the huge forest for many a 
year. The saying of the people appeareth to me as instinct 
with well meaning that a man, if alive, may attain to joy 
even after a century. Do thou relate truly unto me, how 
and in what country the union between Raghava and the 
monkeys was brought about.” Being thus accosted by the 
prince and seated on Ku^a, he, thereupon, began to describe 
Rama’s life in the forest. “How Ramk was exiled, the two 
boons conferred upon thy mother, how king Da^aratha 
died in consequence of (his) son’s grief, how by emissaries, 
O lord, thou wert brought up from the house of thy maternal 
uucle, how thou didst not wish for the kingdom having 
entered Ayodhyi, how thy brother, the repressor of enemies, 
was solicited by thee for accepting the kingdom, reparing 
to the mount Chitrakuta, who hast ever wended the track 
of the pious, the renouncement of kingdom (by him) abiding 
by the words of the king, thy return after taking the sandals 
of thy revered (brother) — all these, O thou of long-arms, 
are known to thee. I shall relate unto thee all that happened 
after thy return. Thyself having returned thence, all the 
birds and animals were overwhelmed with terror and that 
forest appeared as if distressed. Thereupon he entered the 
solitary and huge and dreadful forest Dandaka distressed 
by the elephants and abounding in lions, tigers and deer. 
And they entering the dense forest there appeared before 
them the powerful Biradha* emitting a dreadful sound. And 
taking him up roaring aloud like an elephant Rama threw 
him with his arms upwards and face downwards into a pit. 



* A demon of that name. 



Digitized by 




>534 



JR AM A YANA. 



Having accomplished that difficult work the two brothers 
RSma and Lakshmana, arrived in the evening at the pleasant 
hermitage of Sarabhanga. And Sarabhanga having attained 
to heaven, R&rna, having truth for his prowess, saluting 
all the ascetics, repaired to JanasthSna. And by the high- 
souled R&ghava, living there, fourteen thousand inhabitants 
of Janasth£na were slain. In the company of one person 
only and at the commencement of the fight; by Rama, withirv 
the one fourth part of a day, were exterminated all the- 
highly powerful and valiant inhabitants of the forest of 
Dandaka always putting obstructions in the way of the- 
ascetics. AH the Rikshasas were grinded (to death) by 
RSghava. Khara was slain in the conflict ; Dushana being slain 
first Trishiri was slain thereafter by him. Thereafter (a 
she-demon) named SurpanakhS, came to the side of R3ma. 
Thereupon being commanded by Rima, the highly powerful 
Lakshmana rose up all on a sudden and taking a dagger 
chopped off her ears and nose. Being thus insulted by him 
that she-demon came to R&vana. Thereupon a dreadful 
R&kshasa named M&richa — an attendant of R&vana, assum- 
ing the shape of a jewelled deer, allured Vaidehi. And 
beholding it, Vaidehi spake unto R&ma, saying, — ‘Do thou 
catch it ; with it when caught our hermitage shall be more 
charming/ Thereupon R&ma, with bow in his hand, pursued 
that deer and with one shaft destroyed it. O gentle one, 
R&ghava going out on hunting, and Lakshmana having 
issued out of the hermitage, the Ten-necked (demon) entered 
therein. And he speedily got hold of SitS, like unt® Rohini 
possessed by the planet in the sky. Thereupon slaying 
the vulture YatSyu in the conflict desirous of rescuing her 
and getting hold of SitS that R&kshasa speedily repaired 
(to his capital). Thereupon some monkeys resembling 
mountains, stationed on the summit of a mountain, stricken 
with wondrous fear and astonishment, beheld R&vana, the 
lord of R&kshasas proceed with Sit*. Ascending the car 



Digitized by 




YUDDHAKA NDA M. 



1 535 



Pushpaka , going al will, with Vaidehi and hastening his 
course that highly powerful RSvana, the lord of Rlkshasas 
entered Lanki. And entering the huge and excellent golden 
palace Rivana consoled Maithili with ( diverse ) words. 
But she regarded that foremost of R&kshasas and his words 
*s straw. And Vaidehi was placed in the forest of Aseka. 
Thereupon returned R&ma after having slain the deer in 
the forest. Having returned and seen the vulture, dearer 
than his father, slain, R&ma, the descendant of K&kutstha was 
pained. And searching Vaidehi and ranging at the banks 
of God&veri and forest-lands covered with flowers, Rama 
with Lakshmana, met in that huge forest a Rakshasa named 
Kavandha. Thereupon at the words of Kavandha, RSma, 
having truth for his prowess, repairing to the mount Rishya- 
muka, was united with Sugriva. There had grown mutual 
love in them before they were known to each other. Sugriva 
was driven away by his angry brother Vali, And informed 
of each other's affairs their friendship grew closer. There- 
upon slaying the huge-bodied and highly powerful VStli in 
the conflict by virtue of the strength of his own arms R&ma 
obtained (for Sugriva) his own kingdom. And being placed 
on the throne with all the monkeys, Sugriva promised unto 
Rama the enquiry of the Princess (Sita). Being commanded 
by the high-souled Sugriva, the lord of monkeys, ten 
kotis of monkeys repaired to ( various ) quarters. Among 
them some of us lost our way in a cavity of the Vindhya 
mountain, and were striken with great terror — and accord- 
ingly much time was lost. The powerful brother of the 
king of vultures named Samp&ti communicated unto us the 
residence of SitS, in the palace of R&vana. Thereupon 
removing the grief of my relatives stricken with sorrow and 
resorting to my own prowess, I jumped over hundred 
yoyanas and beheld her placed in the forest of Asoka, 
wearing a red cloth, pale, deprived of all joy and observing 
strict penances. And then nearing her and beholding her 



Digitized by 



Google 




RAMA YANA. 



< 53*5 

of a perfectly blameless person I bestowed upon her an ensign 
a ring with Rlma's name engraven on it. And obtaining a 
jewel as an ensign, I, with my object accomplished, returned. 
And having returned I presented Rama of unwearied actions 
with that ensign of a brilliant gem. And hearing (of the 
news of Vaidehi) Rama regained his life like one on the 
verge of death regaining his being after drinking nectar. 
And exciting (his soldiers) for making preparations like unto 
Fire about to destroy all people he made up his mind for 
the devastation of Lanka. Thereupon arriving at the banks 
of the ocean he had a bridge constructed by Naia by which 
the army of monkey-heroes crossed (the deep). Nala 
destroyed Prahasta, Raghava slew Kumbhakarna,Laksh maria 
killed the son of Ravana and Rama himself slew Havana. 
He was then met by Sakra, Yama, Varuna, Siva, BrahmS. 
and Da9aratha. And that graceful descendant of Kakutstha, 
the slayer of foes, obtained the boon from them as well as 
from the . saints assembled there — (celestial and otherwise)* 
Having obtained the boon he, delighted, met the monkeys 
/ and in the car Pushpaka reached Kishkindha. Again reach- 
ing the Ganges he is living with the ascetic ; it becometh 
thee to behold him to-morrow under the auspices of 
\ of Pushya ,* without any hindrance.” Thereupon being 
) delighted with the sweet accents of HanurnSn, Bharata 
addressed him, with folded hands, with words affording 
delight, saying, — '‘After a long time my desire hath been 
fulfilled.” 

1 m The lunar asterism which etw is the Cancer. 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




\ UDDHAKANDAM. 



•537 



SECTION CXXIX. 



- 2a 






Hearing those words affording great delight, Bharata, 
the slayer of enemies, having truth for his prowess, delighted, 
ordered Satrughna, (saying), — “Let all people being purified 
worship all the deities and altars of the city with fragrant 
garlands and diverse music. Let all the bards conversant 
with the chanting of the pedigree, the flatterers, all those 
conversant with music, the dancing girls, the queens, the 
courtiers, the soldiers with their wives, Brahmanas, 
Kshatryas, and people of all other castes, issue out to behold 
the moon-like countenance of Rama.” Hearing the words of 
Bharata, Satrughna, the slayer of enemies, divided the work 
amongst the servants, (saying), — “Do ye level the high and 
low ground from NandigrSm to (Ayodhya). Do ye perfectly 
water the ground with cold water. Thereafter sprinkle all 
the places with flowers and dried paddy ; hoist up flags all 
over the city; decorate all the houses, before the rising of 
the moon with garlands, jewels, flowers of gold and things 
of five other colours. Let hundreds of men watch the thorough- 
fares.” Hearing the command of Satrughna, issued out 
with delight Dhristi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddartha, Arthasa- 
dhaka, Asoka, Mantrapala and Sumantra. Thereupon issued 
out men on horse back and in cars with thousands of mad 
elephants well-decked with pennons and she-elephants with 
golden seats (on their back). And some heroes proceeded 
encircled by thousand excellent steeds and persons carry- 
ing Sakti, Risthiy maces and pennons and thousands of 
infantry. Thereupon proceeded Sumitra and all other wives 
of Da^aratha placing Kau£alya before them and seated in 
excellent conveyances. And hearing of the return of his 
brother and attaining to delight, the high-souled and 
*93 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




>538 



RAMA YANA . 



pious Bharata, reduced with fasting, poorly, wearing bark and 
skin of an antelope and conversant with religion, issued 
out to receive back R5ma in the company of his counsellors 
and encircled by the twice-born ones, the people of diverse 
castes, his own relations and kinsmen and ministers with 
garlands and Modaka * in their hands, eulogized by the 
bards, having his arrival announced with the sound of conchs 
and bugles and placing the sandals of his worshipful 
brother on his head and taking white umbrella adorned 
with white garlands and white Chowries decked with gold 
and worthy of being used by the kings. Thereupon with 
the sound of the horses* hoofs and cars, conchs and 
hugles the earth shook. And the whole city went to 
Nandigrarn. And beholding the Wind-god’s son, Bharata 
said, — “Didst thou not resort to the usual fickleness of the 
monkeys? We do not behold the worshipful R£ma, the 
descendant of Kakutstha — the slayer of foes. Nor do we 
behold the monkeys assuming shapes at will.** Having 
been addressed with those words, Hanum&n replied, commu- 
nicating unto Bharata, having truth for his prowess, the truth, 
— “Having reached the trees, covered by the favour of Vara- 
dwaja, with fruits and flowers and pouring honey, the monkeys 
are emitting noise like maddened black bees. O slayer of 
foes, this boon was granted him ( Rama ) by Visava. 
(Varadwaya) is treating him with his army with all hospitali- 
ty. H ear the dreadful noise of the delighted monkeys. 
Methinks the monkey host hath crossed the river Gomati. 
Behold the huge upheaval of dust towards the Sdla forest. 
Methinks the monkeys are agitating the graceful Sala forest. 
Behold there at the distance the car resembling the Sun. 
This celestial car Pashpaka , constructed by Brahma's mind, 
was obtained by the high-souled (Rama) after having slain 
Ravana with his friends. This celestial car, resembling the 
newly risen Sun, coursing at will and carrying RSma (was 

♦ A kind of sweet meat. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 





YUDDHA KA NDA M. 



1 539 



gained) by the favour of the Giver of wealth. (There are) 
the two heroic borthers — the descendants of Raghu with 
Vaidehi, the highly effulgent Sugriva and the Rakshasa 
Bibhishana. Thereupon with the sound of “there is Rama” 
there arose a joyous noise reaching the abode of the celestials 
from *among women, children, the young and the old. 
Thereupon descending upon the earth from chariots, 
elephants and horses ail people beheld him (Rama) stationed 
on the car like unto the moon in the sky. And facing 
Raghava and with folded hands Bharata delightedly 
worshipped him with agreeable words, Arghya and water to 
wash his feet. There appeared in the car constructed by 
Brahma’s mind the elder brother of Bharata having expansive 
eyes like the immortal weilder of thunder-bolt. Thereupon 
Bharata humbly saluted his brother Rama seated on the top of 
the car like unto the Sun on the summit (of the mount Meru). 
And commanded by Rima that excellent car drawn by ganders 
got down on the earth with great velocity.. And ascending 
that car, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, reaching 
Rama, delighted, again bowed unto him. And raising 
Bharata up who had been seen after a long time and placing 
him on his lap Kakutstha, delighted, embraced him. There- 
upon Bharata, the slayer of foes, bowed unto Vaidehi and 
welcomed Lakshmana. And the son of Kaikeyi (then in turn) 
embraced Sugriva, Jambabana, Angada, Mainda, Dwivida, 
Nila and Rishava. And he then embraced Sushena, Nala, 
Gab&ksha, Gandham&dana, Sarabha, and Panasa. And 
assuming human shapes, those monkeys, assuming shapes 
at will, delightedly enquired after Bharata’s well-being. 
And embracing Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, the 
highly effulgent prince Bharata, the foremost of the 
pious, said — 11 O Sugriva, thou art our fifth brother. 
From brotherliness groweth friendship and doing injury 
is the sign of an enemy.” And Bharata then address- 
ed Bibhishana with soothing words — “It is by fortune that 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1540 



RAMA YANA . 



through your help he hath accomplished such a difficult 
work.” Thereupon the heroic Satrughna saluting Rama and 
Lakshniana, respectfully bowed unto Sit5. And having 
approached his mother, pale and pulled down with grief, 
ReLma humbly touched her feet and enhanced her delight. 
And thereupon saluting Sumitra, famed Kaikeyi and all his 
mothers he approached the priests. Thereupon all the 
citizens with folded hands welcomed him saying — “Welcome 
art thou, O thou of long arms ! O thou the enhancer of 
Kau^alya’s joy !” And the elder brother of Bharata observed 
the folded hands of the citizens like so many blown lotuses. 
And himself taking the sandals of Rama, Bharata, conversant 
with piety, placed them at the feet of that lord of men. 
Thereupon Bharata with folded hands spoke unto Rama, 
saying — “This all thy kingdom, which thou didst leave to 
tny care, I return thee. Blessed is my birth to-day and 
accomplished is my desire, since I behold thee again as king 
in Ayodhya after thy return. Do thou examine thy wealth 
treasury, palace and army. By thy favour I have increased all 
these ten fold.” Hearing Bharata speak in that wise and 
beholding him devoted to his brother all the monkeys and 
the Rakshasa Bibhishana shed tears. Thereupon placing 
Bharata, in delight, on his lap, Raghava, with his army in that 
car, proceeded towards Bharata’s abode. And reaching 
Bharata’s palace Raghava with his army descended upon the 
earth. Thereupon Rama said to the excellent car — “Do 
thou (now) go to Vaisravana — I do permit thee.” There- 
upon being thus commanded by Rama, that excellent car, 
proceeding towards the north, reached the abode of the Giver 
of wealth. That celestial car Pushpaka had been taken 
away by the Rakshasa (Ravana) ; but now at the words 
Rama it reached (again) the Giver of wealth. And touching 
the feet of his priest the powerful Raghava sat on a separate 
and excellent seat like unto Sakra, the lord of immortals 
(by the side of) Vrihashpati. 



Digitized by v^ooQle 




YUDDHAKA NDA Af. 



i54i 



SECTION CXXX. 



Thereupon having placed her palms on his head 
Bharata, the^enhancer of Kaikeyi’s joy. spoke unto his elder 
brother Rama, having truth for his prowess, saying, — u Abid- 
ing by my mother’s request thou didst confer this kingdom 
upon me ; I do return thee the kingdiom thou didst give 
me. Like unto a young one unable to carry a heavy burden 
thrown off by a powerful bull I am unable to carry this huge 
burden (of the kingdom). I do consider this kingdom 
infested with thieves, difficult to govern, as it is difficult to 
re-construct a bridge broken down by a powerful current 
of water. As an ass cannot follow the course of a horse and a 
crow cannot follow that of a gander, so I am unable, O hero, 
O slayer of foes, to follow thy footsteps. If a tree, planted 
in the inner appartment of a house, growing huge with a 
big trunk and many branches, is dried up as soon it 
blossoms without bearing fruits, his object for whom 
it is planted, becomes fruitless. And this simili, O 
thou of long-arms, shall prove good in thee, if dost thou 
not, our master, govern us, O lord of men, who are thy 
servants. Let the world, O Raghava, behold thee installed 
(to-day) like unto the powerful mid-day Sun burning in 
effulgence. Do thou sleep and rise up with the sound of 
stringed instruments, womens’ girdles and Nupuras and 
charming songs. Do thou govern the people as long as the 
solar system exists and as far as the earth extends/’ 
Hearing the words of Bharata, Rama the conqueror of 
enemies’ cities, saying, — “So be it” sat on an excellent seat. 
Thereupon at the command of Satrughna, expert, skilful 
and quick-handed barbers gathered round Raghava. At 
first, Bharata, the highly powerful Lakshmana, Sugriva the 



Digitized by L^OOQie 




1542 



RAMA YANA. 



lord of monkeys, and Bibhishana the lord of RSkshasas 
bathed. Thereupon shorn of his matted hairs, bathed, with 
paste excellent garlands and precious clothes on, he 
appeared there shining in grace. The valiant and graceful 
Satrughna, the upholder of the dignity of Ikshwaku race, 
himself got ready the dresses for Rama and Lakshmana. 
And all the high-minded wives of Dagaratha with their own 
hands decked SitS with various charming (ornaments). 
Thereupon Kau^alya, delighted and fond of her son, herself 
with great care, decorated the wives of monkeys. Thereupon 
at the words of Satrughna, the charioteer by name Sumantra 
got ready the perfectly beautiful car. And beholding that 
celestial car, bright as the fire of the sun, stationed before 
him, R&ma, having long-arms, the conqueror of enemies’ 
cities, ascended it. Sugriva and Hanuman, graceful like 
Mahendra, bathed, dressed in celestial clothes and wearing 
excellent Kundalas , proceeded (to view the city). And 
then went Sita and all the wives of Sugriva decorated with 
all ornaments and wearing excellent Kundalas , anxious to 
behold the city. All the ministers of king Da£aratha in 
Ayodhya began to hold consultation respectfully with the 
priest. Asoka, Vijaya and Siddhartha, with undivided mind, 
consulted with each other about the welfare of R&ma as well 
as that of the city. (Thereupon they ordered the servants) 
saying, — “Do ye collect materials necessary for the auspicious 
installation of the high-souled (Rama) worthy of being 
crowned with victory”. The priest and the ministers having 
ordered thus all speedily issued out of the city to behold 
R&ma. Like unto the thousand-eyed Indra in his car drawn 
by horses the blameless Rama, seated in his car, proceeded 
towards the excellent city. Bharata took up the reins, 
~ ghna held the umbrella and Lakshmana began to fan 
nun on the head with Chowries. And Bibhishana, the lord of 
RSkshasas standing on one side, took up the white Chowrie 
shining like the second moon. There was audible the sweet 



Digitized by 



Google 




YU DOHA KANDA M. 



1 543 



encomium of Rama chanted by the crowd of ascetics in 
the sky, the celestials and the Marutas. Thereupon the 
highly effulgent Sugriva, the foremost of monkeys, got up 
upon an elephant named Satrunyaya resembling a mountain. 
And riding nine thousand elephants proceeded the monkeys 
assuming human shapes and adorned with various ornaments. 
And with the music of conches and bugles that foremost 
of men entered the city abounding in houses. (And the 
citizens) beheld Raghava enter the city with a graceful person 
and seated in the car. And they having bowed unto that 
descendant of Kakutstha were welcomed by him. And 
they followed that high-souled one encircled by his brothers. 
And surrounded by his courtiers, Brahmanas and subjects 
R&ma appeared beautiful like unto the Moon encircled 
by stars. And he went proceeded by men who play on 
stringed instruments, by people with Karatal and Sustika 
in their hands and by men chanting delightedly auspicious 
songs. Persons with Akshata and gold in their hands, kine, 
girls, BrSlhmanas and persons with Modaka in their hands 
went before R^ma. Thereupon before the ministers Rirrra 
began to describe the friendship of Sugriva, the prowess of 
the Wind-god’s son and the works accomplished by the 
monkeys. And hearing of the works of the monkeys and 
the prowess of the RSkshasas, the inhabitants of the city of 
AyodhyS, attained to astonishment. Having related thus 
(the works of the monkeys) the graceful Rama encircled by 
the monkeys entered (the city of) AyodhyS abounding in? 
delighted and plump persons. Thereupon the citizens 
hoisted up flags upon every house and he reached the pic- 
turesque abode of his ancestors inhabited by the descend- 
ants of Ikshwaku. And having reached and entered his 
ancestral palace and bowed unto Kau9aly3, Sumitra and 
Kaikeyi, the high-souled prince, the enhancer of the joy of 
the descendants of Raghu, addressed Bharata the foremost 
of the pious, with sweet words instinct with meaning, saying, 



Digitized by v^ooQie 



*544 



RAM A YANA 



— “Do thou set apart for Sugriva my huge and excellent 
palace abounding in pearls and Vaidurjas. v Hearing those 
words, Bharata, having truth for his prowess, taking Sugriva 
by the hand, conducted him to the palace. And commanded 
by Satrughna, (servants) speedily entered (that palace) with 
oil, lamps, bedsteads and beddings. Thereupon the highly 
effulgent younger brother of R&ghava spoke unto Sugriva, 
saying, — “Do thou, O lord, order some (to bring water) 
for Rama’s installation.” And Sugriva conferred upon four 
leading monkeys four golden jars crested with diverse 
jewels and said to them, — “Do ye so conduct, O monkeys, that 
ye may return by the dawn with the jars filled with the 
water of the four oceans.” Being thus addressed by the 
high-souled (Sugriva) the monkeys resembling the elephants 
speedily rose up in the welkin like unto quick-coursing 
vultures. Jambavana, HanumSn, the monkey Vegadarshi and 
Rishabha brought the jars filled with water from five hundred 
rivers. Sushena, gifted with prowess, brought that jar 
crested with gems, filled with water from the Eastern Ocean. 
And Rishabha speedily brought water from the Southern 
Ocean. And Gabaya brought, from the great Western Ocean 
in that golden jar, water perfumed with the fragrauce of 
red sandal and camphor. And the virtuous-souled Wind- 
god’s son, gifted with all accomplishments and the prowess 
of Garuda and Wind-god, brought, speedily from the 
Northern Ocean, water in that jewelled jar. And beholding 
water thus brought by the leading monkeys for the installa- 
tion of Rima, Satrughna, with his ministers, communicated 
that unto the leading priests and friends. Thereupon 
the self-controlled Vasishtha, striken in years, along with 
other Br§hmanas placed Rama with Sit§, on a jewelled 
seat. Vasishtha, VijayS, J&v&li, KatySyana, Goutama and 
Bamadeva, sprinkled tliat foremost of men, with clear and 
fragrant water as Vasus did the thousand eyed V&sava. 
(He was then sprinkled by) the Rittigas ) Br&hmauas, maidens 



Digitized by L-ooQle 




F UDDHA KA ND A M. 



1545 



ministers, soldiers and the merchants all delighted. (There- 
upon) with tho juice of Oskadhis* (he was sprinkled by) the 
celestials stationed in the sky, the deities presiding over 
four quarters and all other celestials collected. And having 
placed him on a seat crested with various jewels in the arena 
decorated with gold, various jewels and rich parapharnalia, 
(he placed on his head) the jewelled crown made by Brahma, 
brilliant and with which in the days of yore Manu and other 
kings, born in his race, were installed. And being decked 
by the high-souled Vasishtha with that crown, Raghava was 
afterwards dressed with the celestial garments by the Rittigas. + 
And Satrughna held the white and excellent umbrella and 
Sugriva the lord of monkeys took the white Chowrie . And 
Bibhishana the lord of R&kshasas took up another Chowrie 
resembling the moon. And the wind commanded by Vasava 
conferred upon Raghava, a garland of hundred golden 
lotuses, shining in their native lustre. And the wind com- 
manded by Sakra conferred upon that lord of men a jewelled 
garland crested with diverse gems. The intelligent and 
worthy Rama being installed the celestials and the 
Gandharvas sang and the ApsarSs danced. The earth was 
filled with crops, the trees with fruits and the flowers were 
fragrant on the occassion of Raghava* s installation. And 
that foremost of men conferred upon the twice-born ones 
one million of horses, hundred thousand cows and hundred 
thousand bulls. And Raghava again conferred upon the 
Brahmanas thirty crores of golden coins and diverse costly 
ornaments and clothes. Thereupon that lord of men conferr- 
ed upon Sugriva a celestial garland brilliant like the rays 
of the Sun and crested with gold and jewels. And he, gifted 
with intelligence, conferred upon Angada, Vali's son, two 
Angadas\ brilliant as the rays of the moon and made of 

* An annual plant or herb — one that dies after becoming ripe. 

f A domestic chaplain — a family priest. " • 

X A kind of ornament worn on upper arms. 

194 



Digitized by v^ooQie 




1546 



RAMA YANA . 



Baidurja . And Rfima conferred upon Sita an excellent pearl 
necklace crested with precious jems, celestial clothes and 
various excellent ornaments. And taking off the necklace 
from her person Vaidehi, the daughter of king Janaka, 
conferred it upon the Wind-god’s son remembering the 
services (rendered by him) and cast her looks again and again 
upon her lord and the monkeys. And beholding that (Rama) 
capable of reading the gestures, spoke unto the daughter of 
king Janaka, saying — “O fortunate and beautiful lady, do 
thou confer this necklace upon him with whom thou art 
pleased.” Thereupon the lotus-eyed (Sita) conferred that 
upon the Wind god’s son. And Hanum&n, the foremost of 
monkeys, in whom perpetually exist, energy, forgiveness, 
fame, skillfullness, prowess, humility, tactics, manliness, 
valiance and intellect, appeared with that necklace like a 
mountain beautified with the rays of the moon and white 
clouds. And all other elderly and leading monkeys were 
respectively honoured with clothes and ornaments. And 
being honoured by Rama of unwearied actions with enough 
of jewels and other wished-for objects, Bibhishana, Sugriva, 
HanumSn, J&mbhabSn and other leading monkeys, delighted, 
returned to their respective habitations. Thereupon, the lord 
of earth and the slayer of foes conferred, all wished-for things, 
upon Dwivida, Mainda and Nila. And beholding (the 
installation of Rama ) the high-souled monkeys, taking 
leave of the lord of earth, went to Kishkindha. And be- 
holding the inauguration of Rama, Sugriva, the foremost 
of monkeys, honored by Rama, repaired to the city of Kish- 
kindha. And having obtained his own kingdom, the 
greatly famous and virtuous-souled Bibhishana, with all fhe 
Rakshasas, repaired to the city of Lank§. Having slain 
his foes, the highly generous and glorious Rama, ruled in 
great delight, the kingdom extending all over the earth. 
And Rama, fond of the pious, spoke unto Lakshmana, con- 
versant with piety, saying— “O thou conversant with piety, do 



Digitized by 



Google 






YUDDHAKANDAM. 



1547 



thou with me and four-fold forces, govern this kingdom, ruled 
by our predecessors. Like unto our ancestors do thou now 
carry the burden of an associate in the throne.” When the son 
of Sumitra did not accept the heir apparentship albeit solicited 
earnestly again and again, the high souled (Rama) conferred 
upon Bharata that dignity. And that son of king performed 
various sacrifices such as P aundarika? Aswamedhaf ,B dj imedha 
and others. And governing the kingdon for ten thousand years 
Raghava performed ten horse-sacrifices with excellent horses 
and profuse presents. And that highly powerful R&ma, having 
his arms extended up to the knee-joint, having a spacious 
breast and Lakshmana as his attendant, ruled the earth (in this 
wise). And obtaining that excellent kingdom, the virtuous- 
souled Raghava performed many sacrifices with his sons, 
brothers and friends. And Rama governing the kingdom, 
the widows were not distressed and there was no fear from 
voracious animals or from diseases. The people were saved 
from the thieves and there was no other trouble. And the 
old were not constrained to perform the funeral ceremonies 
of the children. All were delighted and devoted to pious 
observances. And beholding Rama they did not envy one 
another. And Rama governing the kingdom, (people) lived 
for thousand years and had thousand children, — they were 
freed from diseases and sorrow. And the trees bore fruits 
and flowers perpetually — there were showers at will and 
the wind blew pleasant. And the people delighted engaged 
in their respective works and the subjects grew pious and 
truthful, under Raima's regeme, and were devoted to the 
observance of alpfjious works and gifted with all auspicious 
marks. Rama ruled the kingdom for ten thousand 

year<" And this sacred Epic, the first of its kind, affording 
piety, fame, and long life, and describing the conquest of 
the kings, was composed by Valmiki in the days of yore. 

* A kind of sacrifice. 

t A kind of sacrifice in which a horse is slain. 



Digitized by 




1548 



RAM A YANA. 



He, who on this earth, shall hear (this story) shall be divested 
of sins. People, wishing for children, shall obtain the same 
and those, wishing for riches, shall get by them. Thus 
people on this earth shall attain to their wished-for objects 
hearing of this R&ma’s installation — the king may conquer 
the earth and subdue his foes. Females may obtain sons 
(in the same way) as Kau9al>a gave birth to R&ma, Sumitra 
to Lakshmana and Kaikeyi to Bharata. Hearing the story 
of this work describing the victory of R&ma of unwearied 
actions one may attain to a long life. He, who with devo- 
tion and having his anger subdued, shall hear the story of 
this epic written by Valmiki in the days of yore shall get 
over all troubles. And hearing the story of the Epic 
composed by Valmiki in the days of yore, one living in 
foreign countries, shall return home and enjoy in the 
company of his friends. Hearing this people shall 
secure all their wished-for objects from Raghava and 
the celestials shall be greatly delighted. When this book 
is kept in a house it becomes free from the disturbance 
of evil spirits. Hearing this a king may conquer the earth, 
and one living in a foreign country fareth well. If a 
female, during her monthly course, hears the story, she shall 
give birth to an excellent son. By reading and worshipping 
this ancient history people are freed from all sins and 
attain to a long life. The Kshatryas, bending low their heads, 
should hear this daily from the Brahmanas. Hearing or 
reading the whole of Ramayana, forsooth shall people get 
sons and riches. Rama is ever pleased with him. He is the 
ever-existing Vishnu — the first God, the huge-armed Hari, 
N&r&yana and Lord. This ancient work produceth such 
fruits. May good betide ye. Do ye openly declare that 
Vishnu’s prowess may increase. The celestials shall be greatly 
delighted for reading or hearing this story of Rama and the 
progenitors shall be always pleased. Those, who shall 
write this story of R&ma first recorded by the Rishi (Valmiki) 



Digitized by 



Google 




YUDDHAKANDAM . 



*549 



shall reach the region of Brahma. Hearing this people 
attain to, on this earth, multiplied relations, increased 
wealth and crops, beautiful wives, excellent happiness, and 
the accomplishment of all desires. They attain to long life, 
health, fame, intellect, prowess, and good brothers. Therefore 
it behoveth those good men, who wish for prosperity, to hear 
this story perpetually. 



THE END OF YUDDHAKANDAM. 



* 



Digitized by 




<A. \\ 



A 



Digitized by boogie 




Digitized by v^ooQie 




Digitized by 



Google 




Digitized by t^ooQie 




Digitized by t^ooQie 



I 




ES 

THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IF THIS BOOK IS 
NOT RETURNED TO THE LIBRARY ON 
OR BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 
BELOW. NON-RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 




Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 021 38 (61 7) 495-241 3 



WIDENEP 

'VfWVN 

L iwm%oo; 

ft*' < U 2000 

Lcancelled 

BOOK I - 

✓W 



DUE 





I 





r 






Digitized by v^opQie





This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized 
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the 
information in books and make it universally accessible. 

Google" books 

http://books.google.com 





Digitized by LjOOQle 





Digitized by 




Digitized by LjOoq le 





\ \ vl 



r 




Translated into English Prose from the original 
Sanskrit of Valmiki. 



TJTTJsJELAJCAXmAJ&. 



EDITED AND PUBLISHED 

BT 

MANMATHA NATH BUTT, M A. 



CALCUTTA. 

V..— . 

1894 . 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




'l K 3 fc5"3 
. /) a l'-7 
, v '7j 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




286620 



H o 

Jsis $igf)ness 

Sri Patmanabha Dasa Vynchi Bala Sir Rama Varma 
Kulasekhara Kiritapati Manney Sultan Maha- 
raja Raja Ramraja Bahabur Shamshir Jung 
Knight Grand Commander of most Emi- 
nent ORDER OF THE STAR OF INDIA. 

'gflaljaraja of ^rauancotc. 



THIS WORK IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED 

BY 

MANMATHA NATH DUTT* 

In testimony of his veneration for His Highness and in 
grateful acknowledgement of the distinction conferred upon 
him while in His Highness * capital , and the great pecuniary 
help rendered by his Highness in publishing this work * 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




Digitized by LjOoq le 




TTTTAI1A. EANDAM, 



KI^O 



SECTION 4, 



C)n the R&kshasas having been slain, all »the ascetics, for 
the purpose of congratulating Raghava, came to Rama as 
he gained (back) his kingdom. Kaugika, and Yavakrita, and 
Gargya, and Galava, and Kanva — son unto Madhatithi, — 
who dwelt in the east, (came thither) ; and the reverend 
Swastyastreya, and Namuchi,and Pramuchi, and Agastya, and 
the worshipful Atri, aud Sumukha, and Vimukha, — who dwelt 
in the south, — came in company with Agastya.* And 
Wrishadgu, and Kahaslw, and Dhaumya, and that mighty 
sage — Kau^eya — who abode in the western .quarter, came 
there accompanied by their disciples. And Vasishtha and 
Ka£yapa and Atri and Vi^wamitra with Gautama and 
Jamadagni and BharadwSja and also the seven sages, f who 
for aye resided in the northern quarter, (came there). And 
on arriving at the residence of Raghava, those high-souled 
ones, resembling the fire in -radiance, stopped at the gate, 
with the intention of communicating their arrival (to Rama) 
through the warder. And that foremost of ascetics— the 
.righteous Agastya — versed in various branches of learning 
and cognizant of the Vedas along with their branches, — 
addressed the warder, saying, — “Do thou say unto Da^aratha’s 
son that we — the sages — have come (here).” Then at the 

* The name of Agastya had before been just specified among the in- 
comers ; but so it is in the text. — T. 

t Ursa Majory or the great bear, the seven stars of which are the souls 
of as many saints, — Marichi, Atrai, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and 
Vasistha. — T 

195 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




J 554 



RAMA YANA. 



words of Agastya, the gate-keeper quick* and swift presented 
himself with celerity before the high-souled RSghava. And 
that one versed in polity and emotional expressions, of 
worthy ways., possessed of ability, and endowed with patience, 
swiftly seeing Rama resembling the full moon in brightness, 
communicated unto him the arrival of that supreme of 
saints — Agastya. Hearing of the arrival of the anchorets, 
possessed of the effulgence of the sun new-risen, he answer- 
ed the warder, saying,— “Do thou usher them in, having 
regard to their comfort.” And seeing the ascetics before 
him, R£ma with joined hands worshipped their feet with 
arghyas, and with regard consecrated a cow unto each,— 
and saluting them with a collected mind, he ordered seats 
(for the saints). And having, according to their rank, seated 
themselves on gorgeous and superb seats of Ku£a or deer- 
skins embroidered with gold, those foremost of sages — those 
mighty saints, versed in the Vedas, — along with their disciples 
and leaders, having (previously) been asked as to their welfare, 
addressed Rama, saying, — “O son of Raghu. O mighty-armed 
one, complete welfare is ours. By good luck it is that we see 
thee fortunate, with all thy foes finished. By good luck it is 
that,0 king,Ravana — destroyer of creatures — hath been slain 
by thee. Sure,0 Rama, it was no great matter for thee (to slay) 
R^vana along with his sons and grandsons. Furnished with 
thy bow, thou canst, without doubt, destroy the three worlds 
themselves. By good fortune it is, O Rama, that R&vana 
along with his sons and grandsons hath been slain by thee. 
By good fortune it is that to-day we see thee victorious 
along with Sita, and, O righteous-souled one, with thy 
brother, Lakshmana, (ever) compassing thy profit. (By good 
fortune it is) that, O king, to-day we behold (thee) in 
company with thy mothers and thy brothers. By good 

* Turnam — according to the commentator, is mental celerity, and 
drutam— physical. This distinction, however, is seldom, if ever, observed by 
Sanskrit authors.— T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




ZJTTA RAKAND A M. 



*555 



fortune it is that those night-rangers, Prahasta, and Vikata, 
and Virup&ksha, and Mahodara, and the unconquerable 
Akatnpana, have all been slain (by thee). By good fortune 
it is, O Rama, that he than whose proportions there are no 
other’s greater on earth, — even Kumbhakarna, was brought 
down (by thee). By good luck it is, O Rama, that those 
highly powerful night-rangers, Tri^iras and Atikaya and 
DevSntaka and Narintaka, have been slain by thee. By 
good luck it is that thou hadst been encountered in a hand- 
to-hand combat with that foremost of Rakshasas, incapable 
of being slain by the celestials themselves ; and achieved 
victory (ultimately). To defeat Ravana in battle was (for thee) 
a small matter ; but it is a piece of good fortune that 
Ravana’s son, who had confronted thee for combat, hath 
been slain (by thee) in battle. By good fortune it is that thou, 
O mighty-armed one, hadst been liberated from (the bonds 
of) that foe of the celestials whose course resembled that of 
Time ;* — and that thou also hadst secured victory. Hearing 
of the destruction of Indrajit, we congratulate thee (on thy 
success). He was incapable of being slain by all creatures, 
and in battle possessed mighty powers of illusion. Hearing 
that Indrajit slain, amazement hath seized us all. Having 
conferred on us this holy freedom from fear, O Kakutstha 
O repressor of enemies, thou through good fortune, wilt 
grow in victory.” Hearing the speech of the ascetics of 
sacred souls, Rama, coming under the influence of a mighty 
wonder, said with joined hands, — “Ye worshipful ones 

wherefore, passing by those exceedingly powerful ones 

Kumbhakarna and the night-ranger, Ravana — do ye praise 
Havana’s son ? Wherefore, passing by Mahodara, and 
Prahasta, and the Rakshasa — Virupaksha — and Matta, and 

Unmatta, and the irrepressible Devantaka and Narantaka 

redoubtable heroes all — do ye extoil Ravana’s son ? And 
wherefore, passing by Atikaya and Tri^iras and Dhumraksha, 
* i. e . surpassing perception. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAMA YANA . 



15S6 

— that night-ranger — all endowed witli exceeding prowess, — 
do ye extail Havana's son ? What was his prowess ? And 
what his strength ? And what his might ? And by virtue of 
what cause did he surpass Havana ? If I can well hear the 
same, (do ye tell it me). I by no means command you. If 
the thing can bear disclosure, I would hear it. Pray, 
speak out. How was Sakra vanquished by him, and how 
also did he obtain the boon ? And how was the son power- 
ful, — and not his sire — Havana? How could that Rakshasa, 
surpassing his sire, conquer Sakra in mighty encounter, 
and how did he obtain the boon ? O foremost of anchorets, 
do thou to-day unfold all this unto me, who ask (for the 
same).” 



SECTION I 9 . 



Hearing those words of his, the exceedingly energetic 
Kumbhayoni spoke as follows, — “Having regard to his 
(Indrajit's) energy and might, I shall relate unto thee the 
history of his race, in the light of which thou wilt perceive 
why Havana's son had been capable of slaying his enemies, 
but could not himself be slain by them. I shall, O Raghava, 
describe unto thee Havana's race and birth, as well as the 
boon that had been conferred on him. 

'•Formerly in the Krita age, O R&ma, there was a 
Rrahmarshi — lord (of creatures) — son unto Prajapati, and like 
unto the very self of the great-father. His virtues, springing 
from righteousness and excellency of character, are past all 
delineation ; I can only say that, forsooth, he went by the 
name of Prajapati's son. Verily on account of his being the 
son of Praj5pati, be was the darling of the deities j as by 
virtue of his spotless perfections, that magnanimous one was 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




VTTA RAKANDAM. 



*557 



loved of all creatures. And on a religious mission that 
foremost of ascetics, repairing to the asylum of Trinavindu 
at the side of the mighty mountain, Meru, took up his abode 
there. And with his senses centered on the study of the 
Vedas, that righteous-souled one, going to the hermitage, 
carried on austerities ; but his religious rites were disturbed 
by certain girls. And daughters of sages and Pannagas 
and those of RSjarshis, — as well as those of ApsarSs, sporting, 
arrived at that quarter. And on account of every season 
being genial at that spot and also of the loveliness of 
the wood, the damsels, repairing to this place, ever dis- 
port there. And on account of the beauty of that region, 
those wenches, coming to where that twice-born one, Pulastya 
was, used to sing, to play on instruments, and to dance ; 
and thus those blameless beauties disturbed the rites of that 
anchoret practising austerities. Thereat, the mighty ascetic, 
waxing wroth, said,— ‘She that comes within my kin, shall 
conceive/ Hearing the words of the high-souled one, (the 
damsels), afraid of a BrShmana's curse, ceased to haunt that 
place. But Trinavindu's daughter had not heard anything 
of all this ; and, going to the asylum, she ranged it fearlessly. 
And she did not see there any of her associates come to that 
spot. And at that time that exceedingly energetic and 
mighty sage, PrajSpati's son, with his soul sanctified through 
asceticism, was engaged in the study of the Veda. And, 
hearing the sounds of Vaidika recitation, and seeing that 
storehouse of asceticism, she had her body turned pale, and 
signs of pregnancy displayed themselves. And, seeing that 
evil befall her, she was wrought up with anxiety ; and, 
understanding matters, she said,— ‘What is this ?' And, 
going to her father's hermitage, stayed there. And, seeing her 
in this condition, Trinavindu said, — ‘Wherefore is the person 
that thou bearest unlike what it used to be ?' Thereat, in 
woe-begone guise, with joined hands, his daughter replied 
unto that one having asceticism for his riches, — ‘O father, 



Digitized by 



Google 




RAMA YANA. 



XSS8 

cause know I none whereby I have come by this appearance. 
But, searching for my associates, 1 had ere this alone repaired 
to the noble asylum of the Maharshi Pulastya of a purified 
spirit. But associate found there 1 none, that had come 
thither. And seeing this change for the worse of my form, 
I from fear have come hither.* Thereat the RSjarshi, 
Trinavindu, having a live effulgence through asceticism, 
entered into contemplation, and saw the consequence of the 
sage*s act. And coming to know that curse of the Maharshi 
of a purified spirit, he, taking his daughter, went to Pulastya 
and said, — c O worshipful one, O mighty sage, do thou accept 
this daughter of mine, adorned with her native perfections, 
who of herself hath come to thee as alms.* She will, 
without doubt, constantly tend thee, practising asceticism, 
and having thy senses fatigued.* When that virtuous (sage) 
had said this, the twice-born Rajarshi, desirous of accepting 
the girl (after due nuptial rites), said unto the former,— 
‘Well !* Having given away his daughter, the king went 
(back) to his asylum ; and the girl stayed there, gratifying 
her husband with her virtues. And that best of ascetics was 
gratified with her character and behavior. And well pleased 
(with her), that highly energetic one said, — ‘O thou of 
shapely hips, well-pleased am I with thee with thy wealth 
of worth, and therefore, O exalted one, I will to-day confer 
on thee a son like unto thyself, who will perpetuate both 
the lines* — being celebrated as Paulastya. And as thou hadst 
heard the Veda recited by me, so, without doubt, he shall be 
named Vigrava ! t Thus addressed, that noble damsel with 
her soul wrought up with delight, in a short time brought 
forth her son Vtgrava , famed over the three worlds and 
furnished with virtue and fame ; versed in the Vedas, of an 



* Compare Lear : — * Let your study Be to content your lord who hath 
received you At fortune’s alms . 1 — Act I., Sc. I., lines 67—69. 
f i. e. maternal and paternal lines. 

X From the root, Srn — to hear . 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1559 



impartial spirit, and ever engaged in observing vows. And 
the ascetic, Vigrava , was furnished with asceticism even like 
his sire. 



SECTION III. 



.And Pulastya’s son — that prime of ascetics — Vi£ravH — 
in a short time was engaged in asceticism like his father. 
And he was truthful, and of excellent character and controlled 
senses 5 was ever engaged in the study of the Vedas ; and was 
of a sanctified spirit ; and he was not addicted to any of the 
pleasures of life, and was always studious of religion. 
Learning of his ways, that mighty ascetic, Bharadwaja, gave 
unto Vi£rav5 for his wife, his own daughter, Devavarnini. 
And having religiously wed Bharadwaja's daughter, that 
foremost of ascetics, Varava, conceiving the highest delight, 
began to reflect on the welfare of his offspring with an 
intelligence concentrated on them. And on her that one 
cognizant of righteousness begot a child, exceedingly wonder- 
ful, endowed with energy, and adorned with all Brahma* 
qualities. On his having been born, his grand-father was 
rejoiced, and, marking the profitable intelligence (of the boy, 
he thought that) he would be the lord of riches. And well- 
pleased, (Puiastya) in company with the Devarshis (thought), 
— ‘Inasmuch as this is Varava's offspring, and as he 
resembles Varava himself, so he should be known by the 
name of Va^ravana. And then the exceedingly energetic 
Vaisravana, repairing to the wood of asceticism, increased 
(in power) like unto a fire fed by sacrificial oblations. And 
as he was staying in the hermitage, that high-souled one 

* Such as self-control, asceticism, purity, etc. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





i$6o 



RAMA YANA . 



thought,— ‘I shall practise prime righteousness : verily virtue 
is the supreme way.* And for a thousand years, he, having 
his senses controlled, practised rigid austerities in that 
mighty forest, observing (all the while) the most rigorous 
restrictions. And on a thousand years having been numbered, 
he by turns observed the rules relative to each term ; (at 
first) living on water, (then) on air, and (last) going absolute- 
ly without any fare. Thus passed away a thousand years 
like one. And then the highly energetic BrahmSt along 
with Indra and the celestials,coming to that asylum, addressed 
(Vai9ravana), saying, — ‘O child, I am well-pleased with 
thee for this act of thine, O thou of excellent vows. Do thou, 
good betide thee, ask for the boon (that thou wouldst have), 
for, O magnanimous one, thou art worthy of a boon,’ Then 
Vai$navana said unto the great-father, who was present,— 
‘O reverend one, I crave for the power of maintaining and 
protecting people/ Thereat, Brahm£ along with the deities 
gladly said in a gratified spirit, — ‘Very well ! I am about 
to create the fourth of the Frotectors of creatures — Yama, 
Indra and Varuna, — the position which is sought for by thee. 
Do thou, O thou coguizant of righteousness, attain the same ; 
do thou receive the position of the lord of riches. Thou 
shalt be the fourth among Sakra, the lord of waters, etc. 
And do thou take for thy vehicle this car, named Pushpaka, 
resembling the Sun himself, and thus raise thyself to an 
equality with the celestials. Good betide thee ! We shall 
(now) go whither we had come, having, my child, done my 
duty and bestowed on thee the couple of boons/ Having 
said this, Brahma. along with the celestials went to his own 
quarters. On the deities with Brahma at their head, having 
departed for the heavenly regions, the self-possessed lord 
of wealth of subdued senses with joined hands spoke 
unto his sire, saying,— ‘O reverend one, I have received 
the wished-for boon from the great-father, but the exalted 
lord of creatures hath not fixed any abode for me. Therefore, 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTAR A K AND AM. 



1561 



O lord, do thou seek out some dwelling for me, where no 
creature whatever can come by misfortune. * Thus accosted 
by his son, that best of ascetics, Varava, spoke, O righteous 
one, — ‘Listen ! O excellent one. On the shore of the 
Southern sea there is a mount named Trikuta. On its brow 
is a beautiful and broad city built by V^wakarma, named 
Lanka, resembling the city itself of Indra the great, designed 
for the abode of Rakshasas, — like unto the Amaravati of 
Indra. There in Lanka, do thou, forsooth, reside. That 
romantic city is surrounded with a golden wall and a moat, 
and is furnished with engines and weapons ; and hath gate- 
ways of gold and lapises. Formerly she was renounced by the 
Rakshasas afflicted wiih the fear of Vishnu ; and was empty 
of swarms of Rakshas, who had gone to the nethermost 
regions. Now Lanka is vacant, — and there is no one that 
lords it over her. Do thou, my child, for abode, at thine ease 
repair thither. Thy stay there shall meet with no rub, and 
np manner of disturbance shall occur there/ Hearing the 
righteous speech of his sire, that virtuous-souled one along 
with thousands of delighted and joyous Rakshasas, began to 
reside in Lanka stationed on the top of the mount. In a 
short time (Lanka), through his sway, abounded (in wealth). 
And that foremost of Nairitas, the righteous son of Varava, 
well-pleased, abode in Lanka having the Ocean for her 
entrenchment. At times the righteous-souled lord of riches, 
mounted on Pushpaka, in humble guise visited his father and 
mother. And hymned by hosts of deities and Gandharbas, 
having his mansion graced w T ith the dancing of Apsaras, and 
floating on rays like the sun himself, that ruler of riches 
went to his sire.” 



196 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1562 



RAMA YANA . 



SECTION IV. 



^"Tearing the words uttered by Agastya, Rama 
wondered as to how formerly R&kshasas were generated 
in LankS. And then shaking his head, he, struck with 
wonder, momentarily eying Agastya, addressed Agastya 
resembling fire, saying, — “O worshipful one, hearing thy 
words that formerly Lanka had been in the possession of the 
flesh-eaters, I have been seized with great amazement. We 
had heard that the Rakshasas had sprung in the race of 
Pulastya. But now thou hast said that they owe their origin 
to a different source. But were they more powerful than 
Ravana and Kumbhakarna and Prahasta and Vikata and the 
sons of R&vana ? Who was their progenitor ? And what was 
the name of that one of terrific strength ? And through what 
transgression were they driven out by Vishnu ? All this, O 
sinless one, do thou tell me in detail, and do thou dispell my 
curiosity even as the sun dispells darkness.” 

Hearing RStghava’s words, fair and fraught with polished 
phrase and period, Agastya, struck with surprise, said unto 
Raghava, — -“The lord of creatures sprung from water, first 
created water. And the lotus-born one generated creatures 
for protecting that element. And thereupon those creatures 
humbly presented themselves before the creator, saying,— 
‘What shall we do ? We are sore tried by hunger and thirst/ 
The lord of creatures, laughing, addressed them, saying,— 
‘Ye men, do ye carefully guard this (water)/ Thereat some 
said ‘Rakshama/* and others ‘Yakshama/f Thus accosted 
by those afflicted with hunger and thirst, the creator said, — 
‘Those among you who have said ‘Rakshama/ shall be 



* i. e. we shall protect . 
f We shall worship. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



15^3 



RSkshasas ; and those among you, who have said ‘Yakshama,’ 
shall be Yakshas. And there sprang the brothers— repressors 
of foes — Heti and Praheti — lords of Rakshasas, resembling 
Madhu Kaitava himself. Praheti, who was righteous, went 
to the wood of asceticism. And Heti exerted himself to the 
utmost to get himself wived. And that magnanimous one of 
immeasurable soul married the exceedingly terrific sister of 
Kala, named Bhaya.* And on her Heti — foremost of 
Rakshasas and best of those having sons — begat a son, 
known as Vidyutke 9 a. And Heti’s son, the exceedingly 
energetic Vidyutke9a, possessed of the splendour of the sun, 
grew up even like a lotus in water. And when that night- 
ranger arrived at proper youth, his sire turned his attention 
towards his marriage. And that best of Rakshasas — Heti— 
in the interests of his son asked for the hand of Sandhy&’s 
daughter, like unto Sandhyat herself in potency. Sandhya, 
reflecting that she needs must have to be given away 
by her, bestowed her on Vidyutke9a, O Raghava. 
Having obtained Sandhya's daughter, the night-ranger, 
Vidyutke^a, sports with her even as Maghavan doth with tho 
daughter of Puloma. And it came to pass that after a length 
of time, O Rama, Sala Katankata was filled with child by 
Vidyutke9a, as the clouds are furnished with water by the 
Ocean. And then repairing to Mandara,the Rakshasi brought 
forth her child, having the splendour of rain-charged 
clouds ; even as Ganga had delivered herself of the child 
begotten by Fire.J And having delivered herself of her 
offspring, she again became bent on disporting with 
Vidyutke 9 a. And then forsaking her son, she began to sport 
with her husband ; and the child having sounds resembling 
the rumbling of clouds, was renounced (by his mother). And 
forsaken by them both, the infant furnished with the bright- 

* Fear. 

t The evening Twilight — spouse of the Sun, — T. 

t Mahe9wara. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1564 



RAM AT AN A. 



ness of the autumnal sun, entering his clenched fist into his 
mouth, began to cry slowly. And it so fell that, journeying 
with Pcirvati, Siva, riding his bull through the aerial regions, 
heard the sounds of weeping. And along with Um5, he 
saw the Rakshasa’s son, as he was crying. And sent by 
Parvati, whose heart was moved by compassion, Bhava — 
destroyer of Tripura-made that Rakshasa’s offspring attain 
the age of his mother, and conferred on him immortality. 
And for compassing Pirvati’s pleasure, Mahadeva, in- 
destructible and undeteriorating, granted (the Rakshasa) the 
power of ranging the air. And, O son of the king, Um3 also 
bestowed a boon : ‘Henceforth the RSkshasis shall conceive 
in a day, bring forth (child) in a day, and the child shall in 
a day be furnished with'the age of its mother.’ And then 
the great and magnanimous Suke?a, puffed up with the 
receipt of the boons, having obtained auspiciousness at the 
hands of the lord, Hara, began to range everywhere, even as 
Purandara did on having obtained heaven.” 



SECTION v. 



660 

Oeeing Sukega righteous and furnished with the boon, 
a virtuous Gandharva, named Gramani, of the effulgence of 
fire, who had a daughter, called Devavati, like unto a second 
Sri herself, famed over the three worlds, and endowed with 
beauty and youth, — bestowed her on Sukega as if he had 
bestowed the goddess of fortune of the Rakshas. And like an 
indigent person on obtaining wealth, Devavati, on obtaining 
her beloved husband, affluent in consequence of having 
received the boon, was (greatly) delighted, And in her 
company, that night-ranger appeared graceful, even as a 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




VTTARAKANDAM. 



1565 



mighty elephant sprung from AnjanS* doth in the company 
of a she-elephant. In good time Sukega, O RSghava, begot 
(on her) three sons, resembling the three Fires. . And that 
lord of Rakshasas begot (on her) three sons, resembling his 
three eyes — the Rakshasas, MalyavSn, Sumali and that 
foremost of the strong — Mali ; all resembling the three worlds 
possessing themselves in calmness ; like unto the three Fires 
established ; fierce like unto the three mantrasr -* dreadful 
like three diseases springing respectively from morbid Air, 
Bile and Phlegm. f And the sons of Sukega, having the 
energy of the three Fires, grew up like a disease which hath 
been disregarded. And learning that their father had 
received a boon by virtue of his power proceeding from 
asceticism, the brothers, firmly resolved, went to Meru for 
practising penances. And adopting rigid restrictions, the 
Rakshasas, O best of kings, entered upon austerities, terrible, 
and capable of arousing the fear of all beings. And practis- 
ing penances rare on earth with truth and candour and 
self-control, they afflicted the three worlds with gods, Asuras 
and human beings. Then that lord— the four-faced one— 
stationed on a superb car, addressed Sukega’s sons, saying,— 
‘I am for conferring boons (on you).* Knowing that Brahma 
surrounded by Indra and the other celestials was ready to 
bestow boons, they, with joined hands, said, trembling like 
trees, ‘O god that hast been adored through asceticism, 



* The designation of an elephant. 

t The entire edifice of Hindu Pathology is based on the three-fold division 
of the morbid humours into Air, Bile and Phlegm. This division, albeit it 
may appear crude and unscientific to Europeans, taken all, in all, wonderfully 
answers its purpose. The tact displayed by Hindu physicians in diagnosing 
diseases on this method is wonderful. From feeling the Pulse alone, a Hindu 
physician, getting at the predominance of one or more morbid humours of the 
system, can accurately ascertain a patient’s health. The infallibility with 
which predictions of death are generally made, attests the scientific sound- 
ness of the division in question, and renders superfluous any elaborate 
argument in its defence.— T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





1566 



RAMA YANA. 



if thou dost intend to confer on us a boon, let us be 
invincible, capable of slaying foes, immortal, lordly, and ever 
devoted to each oilier.’ Thereat, saying ‘So be it,’ unto the 
sons of Suke?a, the lord Brahma, (ever) cherishing BrShmanas 
with affection, went to the Brahma regions. O Rama, having 
obtained the boons, those night-rangers, rendered intrepid 
in consequence of having the boon conferred on them, began 
to disturb celestials and Asuras. And like unto men abiding 
in hell, the celestials, ChSranas and hosts of sages, being 
harassed (by Rakshasas), did not find any deliverer. And then, 
O foremost of the Raghus, the Rakshasas, assembled together, 
joyfully said unto the undeteriorating Vi?wakarm5 — prince 
of artists, — ‘Thou by thy own energy art the architect of the 
great gods, endowed with energy and prowess and strength. 
Do thou, O magnanimous one, construct a fabric for us after 
our heart hard by Himavkn, or Meru, or Mandara. And do 
thou erect a magnificent mansion for us resembling the 
mansion itself of Mahegwara.’ Thereat Vifwakarma— the 
mighty-arm of the Rakshasas — spoke of a building like the 
Amar§vati of Sakra, ‘On the shore of the Southern sea is a 
mountain named Trikuta. A second aho is there called 
Suvela, ye lords of Rakshasas. On the midmost peak of that 
mountain resembling clouds, inaccessible even to the 
fowls of the air, all the four quarters have been hewn with 
bones* If I am desired by you, I can construct' the city of 
Lank5 (there), having an area of thirty Yayanas, and 
measuring an hundred in length ; surrounded with a golden 
wall and furnished with golden gateways. In her do ye 
dwell, ye irrepressible ones, ye foremost of Rakshasas ; even 
as do the celestials with Indra, approaching Amaravati. 
And occupying the citadel of Lanka, backed by innumerable 
Rakshasas, ye will be invincible to foes and capable of 
destroying them.’ Hearing Vifwakarma’s speech, those 
foremost of Rakshasas, accompanied by thousands of 

* Tanka — may also mean a hatchet or a sword. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM 



i5<>7 



followers, went to the palace and set up in the same, having 
a strong wall and a moat, abounding in hundreds of golden 
edifices. And obtaining Lanka, the night-rangers, exceed- 
ingly delighted, began to dwell therein. At this time, O 
Raghava, there lived at her pleasure a Gandharvi, named 
Narmada. O son of Raghu, she had three daughters, 
resembling Sri, Hri, and Kirti in splendour. And albeit no 
Rakshasi herself, she, beginning with the eldest, gladly 
married to the Rakshasas her daughters having faces 
resembling the full moon. And under the influence of the 
star, Bhagadaivata, those three exalted daughters of a 
Gandharvi were respectively conferred by their mother on the 
three several Rakshasas of eminence. And having wedded, 
O Rama, Sukers sons began to sport with their wives, like 
celestials sporting with Apsar&s. Malyavan's beautiful spouse 
was named Sundari. On her he begot, do thou understand, 
whom ; — Vajramusthi, and Virup§.ksha, and the Rakshasa — 
Durmukha, — and Suptaghna, and Yajnakopa, and Matta and 
Unmatta ; and, O Rama, there was also born a lovely 
daughter of Sundari, Anala. And Sumali's wife, of face like 
the full Moon, named Ketumati, was dearer to him than his 
life itself. O mighty king, do thou, gradually, know the 
offspring that were begot by Sumali on Ketumati, — Prahasta, 
and Kampana, and Vikata, and Kalikamukha, and Dhum- 
raksha, and Danda, and the redoubtable Suparcwa, and 
Sanhr&di, and Praghasa, and the Rakshasa, Bhasakarna, and 
Raka, and Pashpotkata, and Kaikasi of luminous smiles, 
and Kumbhinasi — these are known as the offspring of Sumali. 
Mali had for wife a graceful Gandharvi, having eyes 
resembling lotus-petals, of a lovely look, and like unto the 
most magnificent Yakshi of them all. Do thou, O master, 
listen to me as I mention to thee,0 Raghava, the offspring that 
Sumali's younger brother begat on her, — Anala, and Nila, 
and Sampati. These night-rangers — sons unto Mali — were 
the courtiers of Bibhisana. And those three foremost of 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1 568 



RAMA YANA . 



Rakshasas, accompanied by hundreds of sons — night-rangers 
all — elated on account of their measureless prowess, began 
to worry the sages and serpents and Yakshas, and celestials 
with Indra (at their head). And incapable of being confronted 
(in battle), these resembling Death himself in energy,— 
wondrous elated in consequence of the boon having been 
conferred on them, ranging the world like unto the Wind, 
were ever engaged in disturbing the sacrifices (of the sages).” 



SECTION VI. 



Thus afflicted, the deities, sages, and ascetics, wrought 
up with fear, sought the protection of that god of gods— 
Mahe 9 wara — creator and destroyer of the cosmos, — unborn, 
of an unmanifest form, the stay of all creatures, worthy of 
being adored, — and the supreme preceptor (of all). And 
coming to that enemy of Kama* and foe of TripurS — the 
three-eyed (Deity), the gods, with their voices faltering 
through fear, represented with joined hands, — ‘O reverend 
one, the creatures of the lord of creatures are being (sorely) 
troubled by the sons of Sukega, given to harassing their 
foes, — swolen with insolence on account of the boon conferred 
on them by the great-father, Our asylums, — constituting 
our refuges,— have been divested of their power of granting 
shelter; and driving off the deities from the etherial regions, 
they are sporting there like the immortals. 4 am Vishnu, 1 ‘I 
am Rudra/ 4 am the king of the celestials,’ 4 am Yama/ ‘I 
am Varuna/ 4 am the Moon/ 4 am the Sun/ — flattering 

* The Hindu Cupid. Mah&deva had burnt to ashes K&ma, when he had 
the fool-hardiness to disturb the contemplation of the former. By the way, 
KMid&sa has reared his faery fabric,entitled Kumara Sambhava , on the basis of 
this legend. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



* 5^9 

themselves in this fashion, Mali and Sumali and the R&kshasa 
— Malyavin — as well as those going before them, are 
annoying (the gods), breathing exhilaration of martial spirits. 
Therefore, O god, it behoveth thee to liberate us from fear, 
who have been greatly tormented by it. Do thou, assuming 
thy terrific form, slay the thorns of the celestials. 1 Thus 
addressed by the immortals in a body, that lord, Kaparddi 
of red-blue hue, reflecting that it would be wrong for him to 
destroy Suke^a (with his own hands), spoke unto the gods,— 

* I shall not slay them, ye gods ; they are incapable of being 
slain by me. But I shall unfold unto you the way in which 
they will be destroyed. Do ye, ye Maharshis, in the heat of 
this affair, seek the shelter of Vishnu. That lord will slay 
them.* Thereat, saluting Mahe^wara with the sounds of 
Jaya> (the celestials) afflicted with the fear of the night- 
rangers, presented themselves before Vishnu. And bowing 
down unto the god holding the conch, discus and mace, and 
paying him high homage, they, greatly flurried, addressed him 
about the sons of Suke£a, saying, — ‘O god, by virtue of the 
boon (that hath been bestowed on them), resembling the 
three fires, Sukers three sons, assailing us, have deprived 
us of our abode. There is a city named Lank§, stationed on 
the top of Trikuta, (extremely) difficult of entrance. Taking 
up their station at that place, the night-rangers in a body 
pursue us. Do thou, O slayer of Madhu, destroy them for our 
welfare. We have sought thy shelter. Become our refuge, 
O foremost of celestials. Do thou dedicate to Yama the 
lotuses of their faces, severed (in pieces) with thy discus. 

Save thee, we have none who can, while tormented with 

fright, inspire us with courage. Slay in encounter the elated 
Rakshasas along with their adherents ; and even as the sun 

drieth up dew, do thou dispell this fear of ours.* Thus 

accosted by the deities, that god of gods — JanSrddana— who 
bringeth fear unto foes — cheering up the celestials, said unto 
them, — 'I know the Rakshasa, Suke^a, as flushed with the 

197 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1570 



RAMA YANA . 



boon bestowed by l£5na. And I also know his sons, of whom 
MalyavSn is the eldest. Those worst of RSkshasas that have 
over-riden your dignity will I, wrought up with wrath, slay 
(in battle) ; therefore, ye gods, be of good cheer. , Thus 
addressed by the mighty Vishnu, the gods, highly rejoiced, 
went to their respective quarters, extolling Janardana. 

“And hearing of the activity of the celestials, the night- 
ranger — Malyavin — addressed his heroic brothers, saying, — 
‘The immortals and sages, going to Sankara, spake these 
words, desirous of our destruction, — The terrific sons of 
Suke^a, puffed up, and swollen on account of their strength 
flowing from the boon, are crossing us at every step. We 
have been overpowered by the Rikshasas. And, O lord of 
creatures, from fear of those wicked-minded ones, we cannot 
remain in our own homes. Therefore, to do us good, do thou, 
O three-eyed one, destroy them ; and, O best of consuming 
ones, do thou with thy roars, burn them up. — Thus addressed 
by the deities, the slayer of Andhaka, hearing their speech, 
said, shaking his head and hands, — Ye gods, Suke 9 a , s sons 
are incapable of being slain by me in battle. But I shall tell 
you the means whereby they may be slain. Do ye seek the 
shelter of him who holdeth the discus and mace in his hands, 
and who is clad in a yellow attire, — of Jan5rdana, Hari, even 
of the auspicious Narayana.— Having received this counsel of 
Hara, they, rendering reverence unto that enemy of K§ma, 
came to the abode of Narayana and communicated everything 
unto him. Then Nariyana spoke unto the celestials with 
Indra at their head, — I will slay those foes of the celestials. 
Ye gods, cast off all fear ! — O foremost of Rakshasas, Hari 
promised unto the frightened celestials that he would slay 
us. Therefore do ye think as to what is fit. Hiranyakagipu 
hath met with death (at the hands of Hari), as also other 
enemies of the immortals. And Namuchi and Kalanemi, and 
that foremost of heroes, — SanhrSda — and Radheya, and 
Vahumayi, and the virtuous Lokapala, and YSmala, and 



Digitized by VjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1571 



Arjuna, and Hardikya, and Sumbha and N^umbhaka, — 
Asuras and D^navas endowed with strength and possessed of 
terrific prowess — all these, who, having come to the field, had 
never been heard of as worsted, who had performed hundreds 
of sacrifices, who had been well skilled in illusion, who had 
been versed in every branch of knowledge, and who were 
the terrors of their foes— have by hundreds and by 
thousands been destroyed by Nar&yana. Learning this, it 
behove th you to do what would conduce to the behoof of 
all. It is a sore task to defeat N5r3yana, who wisheth 
to slay us.* Thereat Sumali and Mali, hearing the words 
of Malyavan, said unto their eldest brother, like the 
A 9 wins addressing Vasava, — We have studied, performed 
sacrifices, practised charity, and obtained riches ; and attain- 
ing long health and long life, we have established sterling 
righteousness in our path. And with arms plunging into the 
sea of celestials, we have conquered our unrivalled enemies. 
Therefore, we have no fear touching death. Even Nar&yana 
and Rudra, Sakra and Yama, ever fear to stay before us (in 
the field). And, O lord of Rakshasas, there is no occasion for 
Vishnu's displeasure of us. The mind of Vishnu hath wavered 
in consequence of the evil caused by the celestials. Therefore 
will we even avenge purselves on the gods, from whom hath 
sprung this wrong.' Having taken counsel together, those 
powerful ones conciliated their forces. And proclaiming (their 
order) that preparations were to be made, all the foremost 
Nairitas sallied forth for battle, like unto those led by- Jamva 
and Vritra. And, O Rama, having thus taken counsel 
together, with all the preparations complete, those huge- 
bodied and redoubtable Rakshas marched forth for conflict, 
mounted on cars, and elephants, and horses resembling 
elephants, and mules, and kine, and camels, and purpoises,* 
and serpents, makaras ) and tortoises, and fishes, and fowls 

* How purpoises could be pressed into the service passes my conception, 
unless Sigumtira have arty other meaning.— -T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 







RAMA YANA . 



resembling Garura himself, lions and tigers and boars and 
Srimaras* and Chdmaras.\ And puffed up with pride of 
prowess, the Rakshas march, leaving Lank5, and the enemies 
of the celestials went to the heavenly regions for battle. And 
perceiving the destruction of Lanka at hand, those deities 
that had taken up their quarters there, everywhere were struck 
with fear and felt their spirits depressed. And mounting 
the best of cars, the R&kshasas by hundreds and thousands 
with intent minds swiftly sallied forth for the celestial 
regions. And the deities (aforementioned) followed the tract 
of the Rakshasas. And at the command of Kala, terrible 
evil omens foreshadowing the destruction of the Rakshasa- 
chiefs began to arise on the earth well as in the sky. The 
clouds showered down bones and hot blood. The oceans 
overleapt their continents ;% and the mountains shook. And 
jackals of terrific forms, having voices resembling the roar- 
ing of clouds, — bursting out into a horse-laugh, began to 
emit cries frightfully. Creatures were one after another 
seen to drop down ; and mighty swarms of vultures, with 
mouths belching forth flames, began to wheel over the 
Rakshasa, like unto Kala himself. And blood-footed pigeons 
and Sarik5s§ darted off (around). And crows and two-legged 
cats began to cry in loud accents. But fast bound with* 
the noose of Death, the Rakshasas, proud of their strength, 
disregarding these omens, march on, and do not stay their 
course, — Malyavan and Sum&li possessed of prodigious 
•strength, going before the Rakshasas, like flaming fires. And 
♦even as the gods take refuge under Dhata, the night-rangers 
take refuge under Malyavan resembling the mountain, 
Malyavan. And under the command of Mali, that host of 

* Wilson gives the meanings : (i) ‘a kind of animal,’ and (2) ‘a young 
-deer. — T. 

i Bos Grunniens. 

J Used in the Shakespercan sense : Vide Maibeth. 

$ A species of harlot. 



Digitized by CjOoq le 





UTTARAKANDAM. 



1573 



Rakshasas, roaring like mighty clouds, inspired with the desire 
of victory, went to the celestial regions. And the lord 
Narayana, hearing of the preparations of the R&kshasas from 
a celestial messenger, set his heart on fight. And equipped 
with weapons and quivers, he mounted on VinaUl's offspring * 
And donning on his mail furnished with the effulgence of a 
thousand suns, fastening his spotless quivers filled with shafts, 
being engirt with his waist-band and bright falchion, and 
equipped with his conch, discus, made, Sarnga, + sword, 
and other superior weapons, that lotus-eyed lord, seated on 
Vinata's offspring like a very mountain, set out speedily for 
compassing the destruction of the Rakshasas. And seated 
on Suparna’sJ back, the blue-brown Hari clad in yellow 
attire resembled a mass of clouds on the crest of the golden 
mountain, with lightning playing through it. And hymned 
by Siddhas and celestials and sages and mighty (semi-divine) 
serpents and Gandharvas and Yakhas, the enemy of the 
Asura hosts presented himself, bearing in his hands the discus, 
sword, that weapon — Sdrnga — and the conch. And the 
Rakshasa-hosts, struck by the wind produced by the wings 
of Suparna, with their pennons swinging to and fro and their 
weapons scattered about, quaked like the blue summit of a 
mountain with its crags tossed about. Then the night-rangers, 
hemming in Madhava,§ began to pierce him with thousands of 
excellent sharpened weapons dyed in flesh and blood, and 
resembling the fire of Doomsday.” 

* Garura, N&r«Lyana’s vehicle. 

f The bow of Vishnu is so named. 

X W\.. fair -feathered — a name of Garura. 

$ One of the many designations of Vishnu. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAMA Y ANA. 



1574 



SECTION VII. 



6* A 

xV^ND as clouds assail a mountain With showers, then 
the Rakshasas, representing clouds, setting up shouts, began 
to assail NSrSyana representing a mountain. And Vishnu of 
a bright brown-blue hue, being surrounded by the flower of 
the night-rangers with dark visages, resembled the mountain, 
Anjana, on which the clouds pour down. And as locusts 
(flood) a field, knats (throng) about a flame, gad-flies (cluster) 
around a pot of honey, or makaras (range) the deep, so the 
shafts shot by the bows of the Rakhas, having (the energy of) 
the thunder-bolt and endowed with (the velocity of) the 
wind or thought, pierce Hari as if at the universal dissolu- 
tion. And those mounted on cars (assailed him) with their 
cars, and those mounted on the backs of elephants (assailed 
him) with their elephants, and those riding horses (assailed 
him) with their horses, and the foot-soldiers attacked him, 
stationed in the sky ; and the foremost of Rakshasas resembl- 
ing mountains, by means of darts, rishtis and tomaras , 
suspended the respiration of Hari even as the pranayama * 
doth that of a twice-born one. On being sore tried by the 
night-rangers, like the great Ocean by the fishes (residing in 
it), that invincible one, taking his Sdrnga , showered shafts 
among the Rakshasas. And with sharpened arrows resembl- 
ing the thunder, and endowed with the velocity of the wind, 
shot from his bow drawn to its fullest Stretch, Vishnu cut off 
(Rakshasas) by hundreds and by thousands. And dashing 
away (the Rakshasa ranks) with his arrowy shower, even as 
the wind aroused dasheth away a downpour, that best of 
male beings blew his mighty conch — PSnchajanya. And 

* The practice of regulating respiration and finally suspending the same. 
This is practised by the Yogis of India, who attribute wonderful virtues to 
it. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



*575 



winded by Hari with his utmost might, that water-sprung king 
of conchs, endowed with terrific blares, roared, as if afflicting 
the three worlds. And the sounds of that king of conchs struck 
terror into the R&kshasas, even as in a mighty forest a lion 
(strikes terror into the hearts of) elephants in rut. And 
thereat the horses could not keep their ground, and the 
elephants were reft of their temporal flow, and shorn of their 
virtue at the roars of the conch, heroes began to topple down 
from their cars. And dight with dainty feathered parts having 
heads, the shafts discharged from the Sdrnga, resembling 
thunder-bolts, riving those Rakshas, entered the earth. And 
in that conflict, pierced by the arrows discharged from 
N§rayana’s arm, the R&kshasas began to drop to the ground 
like mountains struck with the thunder-bolt. And the wounds 
on the persons of the foes inflicted by the discus of Vishnu 
discharge blood in streams, like mountains discharging 
streams of red chalk. And the sounds of that king of 
conchs, as well as those of the Sdrnga, combined with the 
roars emitted by Vishnu himself, swallowed up the roars of 
the Rakshasas. And Hari by means of his shafts cut off their 
necks, and arrows, and standards, and bows, and cars, 
and ensigns, and quivers. And like fierce rays streaming 
about from the sun, like torrents dashing from the ocean, like 
elephants coming adown a mountain, or like showers descend- 
ing from clouds, the shafts shot by NSrayana pursue (the 
foes) by hundreds and by thousands. And even as an 
elephant pursueth a tiger, a tiger a wolf, a wolf a dog, a dog 
a cat, a cat a snake, or a snake a rat, so the mighty Vishnu 
pursueth the Rakshasa host ; and others, (struck down by 
him), measure their lengths on the ground. Then, having des- 
patched thousands of Rakshasas, the destroyer of Madhu blew 
his water-sprung (conch), even as the sovereign of the celes- 
tials filleth clouds (with rain). And agitated by the arrows of 
Narayana, with their senses bewildered by the blares of the 
conch ; the broken Rakshasa forces made for Lanka. And on 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAMA YANA. 



1576 

the Rakshasa army having been broken in consequence of the 
beating it got at the hands of NarSyana, Sumali with showers 
of shafts resisted Hari in the encounter ; and as a mist 
envelopes the Sun, he envoloped him (with his arrows). 
Thereat, the RSshasas again summoned up their fortitude. 
And fired with rage, that Rakshasa, inflated with insolence 
on account of his strength, setting up a tremendous roar, 
darted at his antagonist in the conflict, thereby seeming to 
revive the Rakshasas. And as an elephant flourishes its 
trunk, that Rakshasa, lifting up his arm adorned with 
ornaments, began to roar from rapture, like a mass of clouds 
lighted up with lightning. And (Vishnu) cut off the head 
flaming with ear-rings of the charioteer of the shouting 
Sumali ; and thereat the horses of that Rakshasa aimlessly 
strayed hither and thither. And with his bewildered steeds 
Sumali wanders like a person deprived of patience, whose 
senses are under a hallucination. And on Sumaii's car being 
drawn at random by his steeds, Mali, taking his bow and 
equipped therewith, darted at Vishnu's car and assailed that 
mighty-armed one as he was descending on the field of fight. 
And like birds entering the Krauncha,* the arrows discharged 
from Mali's bow, graced with gold, hit Hari and entered 
(into his body). And thereat, as a person holding his senses 
under subjection is not thrown out of his mental balance, 
Vishnu, assailed in that encounter with thousands of arrows 
shot by Mali, was not disturbed ever so little. And then that 
creator of all beings, the reverend Gadadhara,+ twanging his 
bow-string, showered vollies of shafts on Mali. And getting 
at Mali's body, the arrows furnished with the luminousness of 
lightning, drink his blood, like unto serpents drinking nectar. 
And baffling Mali, the holder of the conch, discus, and mace, 
brought down Mali's crown, standard, bow and steeds. And 
then that foremost of night-rangers, on being deprived of his 

* The mountain so named. 

f Lit. the holder of the mace , a name of Vishnu. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





UTTARAKANDAM. 



*5 77 



car, sprang forward, mace in hand, even as a lion bounds up 
from the brow of a hillock. And he with his mace smote at 
the forehead of that lord of birds, even as the Destroyer had 
smitten I^Sna,* or as Indra smiteth a mountain with his 
thunder-bolt. On being severely struck by Mali with his 
mace, Garura, writhing in torments, moved the god away 
from the field of battle. On the god having been removed 
from the field by Mali as well as Garura, there arose a mighty 
din of Rakshas roaring (in chorus). And hearing the 
cheers of the Rakshas, Indra’s younger brother, the reverend 
Hari, sitting awry on that lord of birds, albeit moved off from 
the scene of conflict, waxing enraged, from a desire of slaying 
(Mali) hurled his disc at him. And thereat the disc, possessed 
of the splendour of the solar disc, and resembling the wheelf 
itself of Kala, flooding all the heavens with radiance, brought 
down Mali’s head to the ground. And that head of the lord 
of Rakshasas, terrific to behold, on being cut off (by Vishnu), 
vomitting blood, fell down before (the Rakshasas), as formerly 
Rahu’s head had fallen. And then the deities experiencing 
excess of joy set up leonine cheers with might and main, 
crying, — ‘Excellent, O god.’ Seeing Mali slain, Sumali and 
Malyavan, burning in grief, fled precipitately towards 
Lanka along with their forces. And Garura, being cheered, 
turned round, and growing enraged, as before drove the 
Rakshasas with the wind of his wings. And (some) with their 
lotus-faces cut by the discus, (some) with their chests crushed 
with the mace, (some) with their necks torn off by the plough, 
(some) with their heads riven by the club, and some hewn 
by the sword, and others pierced by arrows, the Rakshasas 
began to drop fast from the sky into the waters of the ocean. 

* There took place an encounter between Rudra and Yama in the Sweta 
forest, for the protection of M&rkandeya and a certain king. In this battle, 
Yama had smitten Rudra. This is narrated in the Pur&nas. — T. 

f The wheel of K&la or Time, representing the Reaper consists, remarks 
R&m&nuja, of days, months, years, decades, centuries, oeons, etc . — T. 

198 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1573 RAM AY ANA. 

And as the thunder-bolt with lightning (riveth) a mighty 
mass of clouds, N&r§yana by means of the thunder-bolts of 
his arrows discharged from his bow, rived the night-rangers 
with their hair dishevelled and streaming (in the wind). And 
the forces having their umbrellas rent, their arms falling off, 
their goodly garments scattered, their entrails coming out and 
their eyes rolling, — became incapable of distinguishing their 
own party from that of the foe. And even like (the roars and 
the vehemence) displayed by elephants on being attacked 
by lions, the roars and the vehemence of the night-rangers 
and their elephants, sore assailed by the Primaeval Lion,* 
were equal. And driven by Hari’s networks of arrows, and 
discharging (all the while) their own showers of shafts, those 
night-rangers resembling the clouds of doom, are driven like 
the veritable clouds of the universal dissolution drifted by 
the wind. And hewn in twain with swords, the foremost 
Rakshasas fell like unto hills (toppling headlong). And the 
Earth was seen to be (covered) with night-rangers resembling 
dark clouds, adorned with jewelled necklaces and ear-rings, 
— falling down, — as if covered with dark mountains dropping 
down.” 



SECTION vm. 

On that host being sore pressed at its back by Padma- 
nabha,t MalyavSn turned back even as the ocean doth on meet- 
ing with its shore. And with his eyes reddened, that night- 
ranger waxing wroth, shaking his head, addressed that prime 

♦ Vishnu as a man-lion had formerly taken the conceit out of Hiranya- 
kacjipu — the Asura king — and slain him, to rid his devotee — Prahlada—of his 
mortal foe in the form of a father. — T. 

f Lit. the lotus-naveled — a name of Vishnu. 



Digitized by Google 




UTTA R A K. AND. AM. 



*579 



of male persons — PadmanSbha, — saying, — *0 NSrayana, thou 
art ignorant of the time-honored morality of Kshatriyas ; and 
therefore like a base wight thou slayest us, desisting from 
fight and exercised with fear. O lord of the celestials, he 
that commits the crime of slaying one that desists from 
fight, cannot go to the celestial regions as the fruit of 
meritorious acts. If thou art bent upon battle, O holder of 
the conch, the discus and the mace, taking up my post (here),. 
I shall see (thy strength). Do thou show (me) the same/ 
Seeing Malyav&n resembling the mountain, MalyavSn, stay, 
the powerful younger brother of the sovereign of the celestials 
spoke unto him,— 1 ! have removed the fear of the deities, 
affrighted at you, by promising that I will make root and 
branch work with the RSkshasas ; and that same promise I 
am now fulfilling. I should always lay down my life for 
serving the celestials ; and you I will slay even if ye should 
go to the nethermost regions/ As that god of gods having 
eyes resembling red lotuses was speaking thus, the lord of 
R&kshasas in high wrath pierced his breast with a dart. And 
hurled by the hand of Malyavan, the dart resonant with bells, 
appeared graceful on Har/s breast like lightning embosomed 
in clouds. Thereat drawing out the same dart, that one 
dear unto the Wielder of the Dart,* having eyes resembling 
red lotuses, aiming at M£lyav3n, hurled it at him. Thereat 
the dart discharged by the hand of Govinda like unto the Dart 
discharged by the hand of Skanda, rushing towards the R&kshasa 
like a- meteor coursing towards the Anjana mountain, 
descended on the spacious chest of the lord of R&kshasas 
decked with the weight of a chain, even as the thunder-clap 
bursts at the summit of a mountain. And on having his mail 
rent, M§lyav&n was utterly deprived of his senses ; but 
(anon) reposing for a while, he again stood like a moveless 
hill. Then taking up a javelin made of black iron girt with 
many a thorn, he furiously smote that deity on the chest. 

* A name of K&rtikeya — the celestial generallissimo. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAMA YANA . 



1580 

And that night-ranger delighting in battle, dealing a box at 
VSsava’s younger brother, moved away to a distance measur- 
ing a bow’s length. And now there arose a mighty tumult 
in the sky of ‘Excellent !’ ‘Excellent V And having struck 
Vishnu, the R&kshasa also hit Garura. Thereat VinatS’s son, 
growing enraged, drove the R&kshasas away with the wind 
of his wings, even as a lusty wind bloweth about sere leaves. 
And seeing his elder brother driven by the wind produced 
by the wing’s of that bird, Sum&li along with his forces, made 
for Lanka. And pushed off by the violence of the wind of 
(Garura’s) wings, the Rakshasa Malyavin also, joined by 
his own forces, departed for Lanka, covered with shame. 
Thus, O Rama, O lotus-eyed one, (the Rakshasas) had 
innumerable warriors beaten down and their foremost leaders 
slain. And albeit inflated with pride, they, incapable of 
coping with Vishnu, leaving Lanka, went to the nether 
regions with their wives for dwelling there. O best of the 
Raghus, these Rakshasas of celebrated prowess, related to 
the race of Silakantankata, remained under the leadership 
of the Rakshasa Sumili. All those exalted Rakshasas going 
under the name of Paulastya that had been headed by 
Sumali, Malyavan and Mali, were stronger than Rivana. No 
other than the god Narayana, holding the conch, the discus 
and the mace, could slay those Rakshasas — foes to the 
celestials and thorns in the side of the deities. And thou art 
that eternal god — the four -armed Narayana, — the lord, undeteri- 
orating and unconquerable, sprung to exterminate Rakshasas. 
The creator of beings — that one ever cherishing those seek- 
ing his refuge — appeareth at times to compass the destruction 
of marauders, bringing the religion of people to rack and 
ruin.* Thus, O lord of men, to-day I have truly related unto 

* This tallies wonderfully with the corresponding view given in the Bible. 
Great men appear in the fulness of time to bring about reforms in 
religion, when, as was the case before the birth of Christ, men have wandered 
farthest from the true path.— T 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM . 



1581 

thee at length the origin of the R&kshasas. Again, O foremost 
of the Raghus, do thou understand the matchless birth and 
potency of R&vana and his sons related in detail. And that 
powerful Rakshasa, Sumali, afflicted with the fear of Vishnu, 
along with his sons and grand-sons for a long time ranged the 
nether regions, and the lord of riches resided in LankS.” 



SECTION ix. 



« A 

^^XFTER a while the R&kshasa named Sum&li, coming up 
from the nether regions, began to range all over the earth. 
And resembling dark clouds, that lord of Rlkshasas decked 
in ear-rings of burnished gold, taking his daughter like unto 
Sree herself without her lotus, and wandering over the earth, 
saw the lord of riches journeying in his Pushpaka, going to 
see his sire — that lord, the son of Pulastya. And seeing 
that one resembling an immortal and like unto fire, journey- 
ing on, (Sumali) struck with amazement, entered the nether 
regions from the earth. And that mighty-minded one 
reflected thus, — ‘By adopting what measure may the welfare 
of the RSkshasas be brought about, and how can we increase 
(in power) V And that great-minded lprd of R&kshasas, 
resembling dark clouds, decked in burnished ear-rings of 
gold, then began to reflect. And then the Raksha addressed 
his daughter, named Kaikasi, saying, — ‘O daughter, the time 
hath come when I should give thee away. Thy youth is about 
to be passed. (Kept back) by the fear of refusal, no suiter 
hath sought thee (up to this time). But desirous of acquiring 
religious merit, we are striving our best in thy interests. My 
daughter, thou art furnished with every perfection like unto 
Sree herself. The being father to a daughter is misery to 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1582 



RAMA YANA . 



every one that seeketh honor. O daughter, one doth not 
know who shall ask for one’s daughter. Wherever may a 
daughter be conferred, a daughter stayeth, placing in 
uncertainty the three races* to which she is related. Do thou, 
my daughter, seek for thy husband that best and foremost of 
ascetics sprung in the line of Prajapati-— Pulastya’s son, — 
Vi^ravS, and of thyself accept him (for thy lord). And then, 
O daughter, even as is this lord of riches, so thou wilt, without 
doubt, have sons resembling the Sun himself in energy.’ Hear- 
ing that speech of his, the daughter for the sake of the dignity 
of her sire, going to where Varava was practising penances, 
stood there. In the mean while, O Rama, that twice-born one — 
Pulastya’s son — was performing the Agnihotra, like the fourth 
Fire itself. And without minding that terrific time, (Kaikasi), 
having regard to the dignity of her sire, coming up before 
him, stood (there) hanging her head down towards his feet 
and throwing up the earth with her great foe. And seeing 
that one of shapely hips, having a face fair as the full Moon, 
(that exceedingly high-minded ascetic) flaming in energy 
accosted her thus, — ‘O gentle on, whose daughter art thou ? 
And whence dost thou come hither ? And what is thy 
errand ? And for whom (dost thou come) ? O beauteous 
(damsel), truly tell me this.’ Thus addressed, the girl, 
with joined hands, said,— ascetic, thou art competent to 
get at my intent by virtue of thy own power. Yet, O 
Brahmarshi, know me as having come here at the mandate of 
my sire. My name is Kaikasi. The rest do thou read 
thyself.’ And thereupon, the ascetic, entering into contem- 
plation, said these words, — ‘O gentle lady, I have learnt the 
purpose that is in thy heart. O thou having the gait of a 
mad elephant, there reigns a powerful desire in thee for 
having offspring. Inasmuch as thou hast come to me at this 
fierce hour, hearken, thou amiable one, as to the kind of 
offspring that thou shalt bring forth. Thou shalt, O thou of 

* The races respectively of her father, mother and husband. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





UTTARAKANDAM. 



1583 



graceful hips, bring forth terrible and grim-visaged Rakshasas 
delighting in frightful friends, and of cruel deeds/ Hearing 
his speech, she, bowing down, said, — ‘O reverend (ascetic), 
such sons of terrific ways seek I not from thee that followest 
the Veda. Therefore it behoveth thee to favor me/ On 
being thus besought by the girl, ViyravS — best of ascetics — 
again addressed Kaikasi, like the full Moon addressing 
Rohini,* — ‘O fair-faced one, the son that thou bringest forth 
last, shall be like unto my line, — he shall, without doubt — be 
righteous-souled/ Having been thus accosted, the girl, O 
Rama, after a length of time brought forth a very terrible and 
hideous offspring having the form of a Rak.sha, -^-having ten 
necks, furnished with large teeth, and resembling a heap of 
collyrium, with coppery lips, twenty arms, huge faces, and 
flaming hair. On his having been born, jackals with flaming 
mouths and other ferocious beasts began to gyrate on the 
left. And that god showered down blood ; and the clouds 
uttered forth harsh sounds. And the Sun was deprived of his 
splendour ; and meteors began to dart to the earth. And the 
earth shook ; and the wind swept away violently. And that 
lord of streams — the ocean, which was calm before, became 
agitated. And his sire resembling his grand-father named 
him, (saying), — ‘As this one hath been born with ten necks, 
he shall be called Ten-necked/ After him was born 
Kumbhakarna endowed with prodigious strength, than whose 
proportions there are none other’s on earth. Then was born 
she that, having a frightful visage, goeth under the name of 
Surpanakha ; the righteous Bibhishana is the youngest son of 
Kaikasi. On that one endowed with great strength having 
been born, blossoms were showered down from heaven ; and 
celestial kettle-drums were sounded in the heavenly regions. 
And then there arose the sounds of ‘Excellent V ‘Excellent V 
And in that extensive forest those exceedingly energetic ones 
— Kumbhakarna and the Ten-necked one grew up, — and 

* Hesperus, 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1584 



RAMA YANA. 



became the sources of anxiety to people. And Kumbhakarna, 
maddened to the height, devouring mighty saints devoted to 
religion, constantly ranged the triune world in a dissatisfied 
spirit. But the righteous Bibhishana, ever intent on piety, 
dwelt there, studying the Veda, restraining his fare, and 
controlling his senses. And it came to pass that after a 
length of time the god, Vai$ravana — lord of riches — came to 
see his sire, mounted on Pushpaka. Seeing him, the 
Rikshasi — Kaikasi — flaming up in energy, coming to the 
Ten-necked one, represented to him, — ‘O son, behold thy 
brother, Vai^ravana, enfolded in effulgence ; and, albeit of 
equal fraternity, behold thee in this plight ! Therefore, O 
Ten-necked one, O thou of measureless prowess, do thou so 
strive that thou also, my son, may be like Vai^ravana himself/ 
Hearing that speech of his mother, the powerful Ten-necked 
one was wrought up with exceeding great ill-will, and he vowed 
then, — *1 truly promise unto thee that I will be equal to my 
brother (in energy), or excell him in it. Therefore do thou 
cast off this sorrow that is in thy heart/ And influenced by 
that passion, the Ten-necked one with his younger brother 
began to perform rigid acts, with his mind fixed on asceticism. 
‘I must through austerities have my wish/ thus fixed and 
resolved, he for compassing his end, came to the sacred 
asylum of Gokarna. And there the RSkshasa of unrivalled 
prowess along with his younger brother carried on austerities 
and thus gratified that lord — the great-father. And being 
gratified (with him), he conferred on him boons bringing on 
victory.” 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTA RAKAND A M. 



*5 8 S 



SECTION X. 



Then R5ma spoke unto the ascetic, — “O Br&hmana, how 
did those exceedingly mighty brothers carry on austerities 
in that forest ; and what kind of penances was theirs ?” 
Thereat there Agastya said unto Rama of a complacent 
mind, — “The brothers severally observed the morality proper 
to each. And Kumbhakarna, putting* forth his best energies, 
constantly abode in the path of righteousness. And remain- 
ing in the midst of five fires in summer, he practised austerities, 
and in the rainy season, soaked in water (poured down) by 
clouds, he sat in the heroic attitude.* And in winter he always 
remained in the water. Thus passed away ten thousand 
years of that one putting forth exertions in behalf of religion, 
and established in the path of honesty. And the virtuous 
Bibhishana, ever intent on virtue and pure of spirit, remained 
standing on one leg for five thousand years. And w T hen he 
had completed (his term of restriction), swarms of Apsaras 
danced, and blossoms showered, ami the deities hymned 
(him). And for five thousand years, he adored the Sun, and 
with his mind concentrated in the study of the Veda, remained 
with his head and hands raised up. In this wise Bibhishana 
like a deity in Nandana passed away ten thousand years, 
observing restrictions. And the Ten-necked one passed ten 
thousand years without fare. On a thousand years being 
complete, he offered his own head as a sacrifice to Fire. In 
this way he passed away nine thousand years ; and nine of 
his heads entered into Fire. And as in the tenth year he 
intended to strike off his tenth head, the Great-father present- . 
ed himself at that place. And well-pleased, the Great-father 
came there along with the celestials. ‘O Ten-necked one/ 

* Hindu Yogis practise various attitudes, which are favorable to the 
regulation of respiration. — T. 

199 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




15S6 



RAMA YANA. 



said (the Great-father), ‘I am well-pleased with thee. Do thou, 
O thou cognizant of righteousness, at once ask for the boon 
that thou wishest to have. What wish of thine shall I realize ? 
Thy toil must not go for nothing/ Thereat, the Ten-necked 
one, bowing down his head unto the deity, said with a delighted 
heart, — his words faltering with ecstacy, — *0 Reverend one, 
creatures have no other fear than (that of) death ; and enemy 
there is none that is like unto death. Therefore immortality 
is even what I crave for/ Thus accosted, BrahmS spoke unto 
the Ten-necked one, — ‘Thou canst not be immortal. Do thou 
therefore ask of me some other boon/ Thus addressed by the 
creator, Brahma, the Ten-necked one, O Rama, standing 
before him with joined hands, said, — ‘O lord of creatures, I 
would, O eternal one, be incapable of being slain by birds and 
serpents, Yakshas, Daityas, Danavas and Rakshasas, and the 
deities ; for, O thou that art worshipped by the immortals, 
anxiety I have none from any other beings. Indeed, I deem 
as straw creatures such as men etc.' Thus accosted by the 
Raksha — the Ten-necked one — that righteous-souled one, the 
Great-father, along with the celestials, said, — ‘O foremost of 
Rakshasas, what thou sayest shall come to pass/ Having, 
O Rama, said this unto the Ten-necked one, the Great- 
father (again spoke), — ‘Hear ! I, having been gratified, will 
confer on thee a fresh boon. O Rakshasa, O sinless one, 
those heads of thine which have been offered as sacrifices and 
which have sunk into the fire, shall again be thine. And, 
O placid one, I shall also confer on thee another boon difficult 
of being obtained, — The form that thou shalt wish to wear, 
shall instantly be thine/ As soon as the Ten-necked Raksha 
had spoken thus, the heads that had been offered as sacrifices 
into the fire, rose up again. Having said this unto the 
Ten-necked one, the Great-sire of all creatures addressed 
Bibhishana, saying, — ‘O Bibhishana, gratified have I been by 
thee, whose intelligence is established in righteousness. 
Therefore, my child, O righteous-souled one, O thou of 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




V TTA RA KA NDA M. 



1587 



excellent vows, ask for the boon that thou wouldst have.’ 
Thereat the virtuous Bibhishana spoke with joined hands,— 
‘O reverend one, since the spiritual preceptor of all creatures 
himself (is pleased) with me, — I (deem myself) as furnished 
with every perfection, even as the Moon is environed with 
rays. If thou wilt bestow on me a boon with pleasure, then, 

0 thou of excellent vows, hear of the boon that I would have. 
May my mind remain fast fixed on righteousness, even when 

1 shall happen to fall into high peril ; and may I attain 
Brahma knowledge without any instructions ! And may every 
sense of mine sprung during the observance of particular 
modes of life, be in unison with righteousness, — so that I may 
practise the form of religion (in harmony with any particular 
mode of life !) O exceedingly noble one, this best of boons, 
is even what is sought for by me, for nothing in this world is 
incapable of being attained by those attached to righteous- 
ness/ Then the lord of creatures, being again delighted, 
spoke unto Bibhishana, — ‘As thou art virtuous, so all this shall 
come to pass on thy behalf. And inasmuch as in spite of thy 
having been born in the Rakshasa race, thy thoughts, O 
destroyer of enemies, do not originate in sin, I confer on the 
immortality/ Having said this, he intended to grant boons 
unto Kumbhakarna. Thereat the celestials in a body 
represented to the lord of creatures with joined hands, — ‘On 
Kumbhakarna thou shouldst confer no boons, since thou 
knowest in what manner doth this wicked-minded one frighten 
people. And, O Brahman, seven Apsaras in Nandana, ten 
attendants of Mahendra, as well as sages and human beings, 
have been devoured by this one. Considering what this Rakshasa 
did when he had not obtained any boon whatever, if he obtain 
one now, he shall eat up the three worlds. Do thou then, 
O lord having immeasurable prowess, pretending to give him a 
boon, give stupifaction (instead). Thereby the welfare of people 
would be secured, and the honor of this one too shall be main- 
tained/ Thus addressed by the celestials, Brahma, the Lotus- 



Digitized by CjOoq le 




RAMA YANA. 



1 5 £8 

sprung one, pondered. The goddess, Saraswati, who was by his 
side was also agitated with anxiety. And remaining by him, 
Saraswati with joined hands observed, — ‘O god, I have come 
here. What work shall I accomplish ?’ And the lord of 
creatures, on having her, spake unto Saraswati, — ‘O Vani !* 
be thou the goddess of speech of this foremost of Rakshasas,+ 
favorable unto the deities. Having said, — ‘So be it/ she 
entered (within Kumbhakarna* s throat) ; and Praj&pati 
said, — ‘O Kumbhakarna, O mighty^armed one, do thou ask 
for the boon that thou wouldst have. Hearing those words, 
Kumbhakarna said, — ‘O god of gods, my wish is that I may 
sleep for a good many years/ Thereupon, saying, — ‘So be it/ 
BrahmS along with the celestials went away ; and the goddess, 
Saraswati, also again left the Rlkshasa. And on Brahma 
accompanied by the deities going to the celestial regions, he 
was renounced by Saraswati, and then he regained his 
consciousness. And then the wicked-minded Kumbhakarna 
sorrowfully thought, — ‘What is this speech that has to-day 
come out from my lips ? Meseems I had then been stupified 
by the deities that had come/ Having thus obtained the 
boons, the brothers endowed with flaming energy, going to the 
Sleshm&taka wood, began to dwell there peacefully.” 



* Lit . word, a designation of Saraswati. 

f i. e. preside over Kumbhakarna’s speech while asking for the boon,— 
and let him, through thy power, ask for such a gift as may turn out profitable 
to the gods. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




VTTARAKANDAM. 



1589 



SECTION XI. 

JLiEARNlNG that these night-rangers had obtained boons f 
Sumali with his followers, casting off fear, rose up from the 
nether regions. And wrought up with exceeding great wrath, 
the counsellors of that Raksha — M&richa and Prahasta and 
Virupaksha and Mahodara — also rose up. And accompanied 
by his counsellors— foremost of Rakshasas — Sum&li presenting 
himself before the Ten-necked one and embracing him, ad- 
dressed him, saying, — ‘By good fortune it is,0 child, that through 
thee we have had the wish that was in our heart, inasmuch 
as thou hast received the best of boons from him that is the 
foremost in all these three worlds. O mighty-armed one, that 
great fear arising from Vishnu, from which leaving Lanka, 
we had gone to the nethermost abysses, hath been removed. 
Full many a time, brought down by that fear, we, on being 
pursued (by our enemies), forsaking our homes, had gone to 
the nether regions along with all those (related to us). This 
Lanka was our city, inhabited by Rilkshasas. (Now) it is 
inhabited by thy brother — the intelligent lord of riches. O 
mighty-armed one, if thou canst through self-control or charity 
or by a sudden display of prowess, repossess thyself of the 
same, a (great) thing shall have been achieved ; and then, 
O child, thou shouldst, without doubt, be the lord of Lanka ; 
and this Rakshasa race,which hath sunk, shall have been raised 
up by thee. And, O thou endowed with prodigious strength, 
thou shalt be the lord of a:ll. J Then the Ten-necked one 
addressed his maternal grand-father, who was present, saying, 
—‘The lord of riches is our superior ; therefore thou ought 
not to speak thus.* On that dignified R5kshasa-chief having 
through moderation thus passed it by, that Raksha, under- 
standing his intent, did not then say anything more. And 
it came to pass that when RSvana had resided there for 



Digitized by Google 




RAMA YANA . 



x 59° 

a time, Prahasta addressed him in a humble speech, — 'O 
Ten-necked one, O long-armed (hero), it doth not behove thee 
to speak thus. Fraternal feeling there is none among heroes. 
Listen to these words of mine ! There were two sisters — 
Aditi and Diti. And mutually attached to each other, those 
(damsels) endowed with surpassing beauty, became the wives 
of that lord of creatures — Ka^yapa. And Aditi brought forth 
the gods, — who are the lords of the three worlds. And 
Diti gave birth to the Daityas, — offspring of Ka9yapa. O 
thou cognizant of righteousness, formerly this earth, O hero, 
having the ocean for her garment, and furnished with 
mountains, belonged to the Daityas ; and (gradually) they 
grew very powerful. And then this undeteriorating triune 
world was brought under the dominion of the celestials. So 
that thou art not the only one that would act inimically (to 
thy brother) ; but this course had formerly been pursued by 
both the celestials and the Asuras. Therefore do thou act in 
conformity with my word/ Thus exhorted, the Ten-necked 
one, with a delighted heart, reflecting for a moment, said, 
‘Very well/ And wrought up with delight, the Ten-necked 
one endowed with prowess the very same day went to the 
forest, accompanied by the night-rangers. And arriving at 
Trikuta, that one skilled in speech — the night-ranger, Ravana 
— sent Prahasta in the capacity of an ambassador : ‘O 

Prahasta, hie thee ; and tell the foremost of Nairitas — the lord 
of riches — in my words informed with mildness, — This city 
of Lanka, O king, belongs to the high-souled Rakshasas ; but 
thou hast established thyself in her. This, O sinless one, is 
not proper for thee. Therefore, O thou of unrivalled prowess, 
if thou shouldst render the same (back), I shall be highly 
gratified ; and righteousness also thou wilt maintain. — * There- 
upon, repairing to LankS, well-protected by (the giver of riches, 
Prahasta communicated these words unto the highly generous 
ruler of riches, — 'O thou of excellent vows, I have been sent 
to thee by thy brother, the Ten-necked one. O long-armed 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1591 

one, 0 foremost of those versed in all branches of learning, 
do thou listen to my words, O lord of wealth, — and what the 
Ten-faced one says, — This beautiful city, O thou furnished 
with expansive eyes, was formerly inhabited by R&kshasas of 
dreadful prowess headed by Sumali ; and for that reason, O 
son of Varava, he asks thee this. Do thou, my child, grant 
this unto him, who is humbly begging for it/ — Hearing these 
words from Prahasta, the god Va^ravana, best of those 
skilled in speech, answered the former, saying, — ‘My father 
had given this unto me, when it had been emptied of night- 
rangers ; and, O Raksha, I have inhabited this place, 
furnished with charity, honor, and other virtues. Go and tell 
the Ten-necked one, as this city and this kingdom are mine, 
so they are thine, O mighty-armed one. Do thou enjoy this 
kingdom without a foe. May my kingdom and wealth never 
undergo division ’when thou art present !’ Having said this, 
the lord of riches saught the side of' his sire, — and, paying 
him reverence, he communicated R^vana’s wish unto him : 
‘My father, this Ten-necked one had sent a messenger to me, 
saying, — Give (back) the city of Lanka, which had before 
been inhabited by hosts of Rakshas. — Now, O thou of 
excellent vows, do thou tell me what I should do/ Thus 
accosted, that foremost of ascetics, the Brahmarshi — Varava 
— spoke unto the lord of riches (standing) with joined hands, 
— ‘O son, listen to my words. The mighty-armed Ten-necked 
one had (once) spoken inhny presence (to that effect). There- 
at I greatly rebuked that wicked-minded one ; and I said 
again and again in anger,— Thou disregardest (thy religion 
and honor). Do thou listen to my words fraught with religion 
and profit. Of a wicked heart, thou, with thy understanding 
spoilt in consequence of the granting of the boon, canst 
not distinguish between those deserving honor and those not ; 
and, further, through my curse, thou hast come by a fierce 
nature. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, go to the mountain, 
Kailua. Do thou, along with thy retainers, for the purpose 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAM AY AN A. 



* 59 * 

of dwelling there, take up thy quarters (there). There floweth 
the Mandakini — best of streams, with her water covered with 
golden lotuses resembling suns, as also with lilies and blue 
lotuses and various other fragrant flowers. And coming 
there frequently, celestials with Gandharbas and ApsarSs and 
serpents and Kinnaras ; ever sport there, O.lord of riches, 
thou ought not to enter into hostilities with that Raksha. 
Thou knowest how he hath obtained a great boon/ Thus 
addressed, Vi$ravana, for the sake of his father’s dignity, with 
his wives and sons, with his counsellors and his vehicles 
and wealth went (to Kailua). And Prahasta, going (back), 
joyfully spoke unto the high-souled Ten-necked one, (seated) 
with his counsellors and his younger brothers, — ‘The city 
of Lanka is (now) empty. Renouncing her, the bestower of 
riches hath gone out of her. (Now) entering into her, along 
with us, do thou there maintain thine own religion.’ Thus 
addressed by Prahasta, the redoubtable Ten-necked one 
entered the city of Lanka with his brothers and forces and 
followers. And then even as the lord of the celestials 
ascends heaven, that foe of the immortals ascended 
Lanka well- divided by highways, — which had been for- 
saken by the lord of wealth. And having been installed, 
that night-ranger — the Ten-faced one — dwelt in that city ; and 
that city teemed with night-rangers resembling dark clouds. 
And the lord of riches, for the sake of his father’s dignity, 
dwelt in a palace situated on the hill bright as moon-light* 
graced with ornamented superb piles ; even as Purandara 
dwells in Amaravati.” 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTAR A KANDAM . 



1 59 J 



SECTION XII. 



i*rr\ 

X. HE lord of Rlkshasas was installed along with his 
brothers. And then he thought of the giving away in 
marriage of his Rakshasi sister. Then that Rakshasa 
bestowed his sister, the Rakshasi Surpanakha, on that lord of 
the Danavas and king of the K&lakas — Vidyujjibha. And 
having given her away, the Raksha was wandering about for 
the purpose of hunting, when, 0 R&ma, he happened to see 
Diti’s son, named Maya. And seeing him accompanied by 
his daughter, that night-ranger — the Ten-necked one — asked 
him, saying, — ‘ Who art thou that ( wanderest ) alone in 
this forest devoid of men as well as deer ? And art thou 
accompanied by this one having the eyes of a young deer ?' 
Thereat Maya, O RSma, answered that night-ranger, when 
he had asked this, — 'Listen. I shall tell thee all about this. 
Thou mayst ere this have heard of an ApsarS named HemS. 
She like unto the Paulomi of Satakratu was bestowed on me 
by the gods. And I passed a thousand years, being devoted 
to her. Thirteen years have pissed away since she had gone 
on a business of the celestials, as also the fourteenth year. 
Then I through my extraordinary skill constructed a golden 
palace, adorned with diamonds and lapises. There I dwelt, 
aggrieved and sorrowful on account of her separation. From 
thence, taking my daughter, I have come to this wood. This, 
O king, is my daughter, grown in her womb. I have come 
hither with her, seeking for her husband. Verily being father 
to a daughter is misery to every one that seeketh one’s honour. 

A daughter, forsooth, stayeth, ever placing the two lines* 

» - 

* The lines, namely, of her father and mother. The line of a mother as 
distinct from that of a father would be impossible under the present economy 
of Hindu society inasmuch as, as soon as a girl is married, she by that 
ceremony leaves her father’s line and becomes incorporated with that of her 

200 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1594 



RAMA YANA . 



in uncertainty. And on this wife of mine I have also begat 
two sons -the first is Mfty&vi and the next Dundubhi. Thus 
have I truly related everything unto thee that hadst asked for it. 
But, my child, how can I know thee now ? Who art thou ?* 
Thus addressed, the Raksha humbly said,— ‘Ten-necked by 
name, I am the son of the ascetic, Paulastya, who was born 
as the third son of Brahma/ Thus accosted, O .RSma, by that 
lord of Rakshasas, that Danava and foremost of Danavas, 
Maya, learning that he was the son of the Maharshi, Paulastya, 
there desired in his heart to give away his daughter to him. 
And taking her hand with his own, Maya — lord of Daityas— 
laughing, said unto that lord of the Rakshasas, — * This 
daughter of mine, O king, borne by the Apsara, Hema, this 
my daughter named Mandodari do thou accept as thy wife/ 
‘Weir thereupon the Ten-necked answered him, O Rama. 
And lighting a fire, he took her hand. Maya, O Rama, knew 
the curse of the sage touching him.* Knowing this, he gave 
away his daughter, having regard to the race of Ravana’s 
paternal grand-father ; and he also conferred on him an 
exceedingly wonderful dart acquired through the most rigid 
austerities, — by which he wounded Lakshmana. Having thus 
wedded, that master — Lankan lord — going (back) to that city, 
married his brothers. And Ravana married the grand-daughter 
of Virochana (on the maternal side) named Vajrajwala, to 
Kumbhakarna. — And Bibhishana obtained for his wife the 
righteous (damsel) named Sarama — daughter unto the high- 
souled— Sailusha— sovereign of the Gandharvas. (Sarama) 
was born on the shores of the lake, Manasa. And while the 
lake, Manasa, was swollen with water on the arrival of the 
rains, her mother, hearing her cries, affectionately said,— 
Saromavarddhata — ‘O lake, do not swell/ and from this 
circumstance, her name became Sarama. Having thus 

husband. But this seems to have been otherwise in ancient times. This opens 
up an interesting social problem for the research of orientalists.— T. 

* Respecting his birth. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTa rakandam. 



1595 



wedded, those RSkshasas, taking each his wife, set about 
sporting there, like unto Gandharvas sporting in Nandana. 
And then was born Mandodari’s son— Meghan&da. Him ye 
call Indrajit. As soon as he was born, Rlvana’s son, formerly 
crying, emitted a tremendous roar resembling the rumbling 
of clouds. And, O RSghava, Lanka was petrified at his 
voice ; and (accordingly) his sire himself kept his name, 
MeghanSda. And, O R^ma, remaining hidden like a fire by 
fuel, R^vana’s son, rejoicing (the bosoms of) his father and 
mother, grew up in R&vana’s elegant inner apartments.* 



SECTION XIII. 



“ A 

,i\ND once on a time it came to pass that, despatched by 
the lord of creatures, Sleep in her (native) form powerfully 
overpowered Kumbhakarna. And then Knmbhakarna spoke 
unto his brother, who was seated, — ‘O king, Sleep obstructs 
me. Do thou, therefore, have my mansion made.* And, 
thereupon, employed by the king, architects resembling 
Vigw^karma constructed an edifice beautiful to behold, 
measuring the smooth space of a Yojana diagonally and two in 
area ; graceful to the view, and having no obstruction (to hide its 
beauty). And the Rikshasa caused a splendid and delightful 
pile to be built, adorned all round with pillars decked with 
gold and crystal, — having stairs composed of lapises, furnished 
with networks of small bells, set with ivory gateways, and 
containing daises dight with diamonds and crystal,— elegant 
throughout, and enduring, — like unto a goodly cave of 
Maru. And there, overcome with slumber, the wondrous 
strong Kumbhakarna, lying down for many thousand years, 
did not wake up. And while Kumbhakarna was overpowered 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAMA YANA. 



1596 

by sleep, Da^anana* without let began to destroy Devarshis, 
Yakshas and Gandharbas, — and going to graceful gardens. 
Nan dan a, etc, he devastated them (ruthlessly). And that 
R^kshasa spread destruction, even as an elephant sporting 
agitates a river, as the wind bringeth down trees, or as the 
thunderbolt riveth mou n tain speaks , Hearing of the doings 
of Da 9 agriva,+ and remembering his conduct chiming in 
with his race, the righteous lord of riches — Vaigravana — 
showing his fraternal affection, despatched a messenger to 
Lank!, seeking the welfare of Da^agriva. And going to the 
city of Lanka, he presented himself before Bibhishana. And 
having received him with honor, he asked him as to the cause 
of his visit. And having enquired after the welfare of the king 
as well as his kindred, Bibhishana, showed him unto Da£5nana 
seated in his court. And seeing the king there flaming in 
his own energy, he (the messenger), saluting him (RSvana) 
with the word — Jayct% — stood silent. And the envoy address- 
ed Da£agriva seated on a superb couch, graced with a costly 
coverlet, — ‘ O king, I shall tell thee all that thy brother hath 
said, worthy of both the character and race of your father and 
mother, — Enough of wrong-doing. Now thou shouldst mend 
thy ways. If thou canst, stay in righteousness, I have seen 
Nandana ravaged ; and I have heard of the sages slain, and 
O king, of the preparations the deities are making against 
thee. I have been utterly disregarded by thee ; but even if a 
boy should transgress, he should for all that be protected by 
his friends. Sel ^restrained and controlling my senses, I, 
adopting a terrific vow, had gone to the breast of the Himav§n 
for practising righteousness, There I saw that lord of the gods 
in company with Um3, There I happened tp cast my left 



* Henceforth we shall use this significant surname of R&vana, meaning 
Ten-faced. 

f Ten-necked. 

t Jaya may mean (1) victory and (2) all the deities of the Hindu 
pantheon. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





UTTA RARANDAM. 



1597 



eye on the goddess, for knowing, O mighty king, who she 
was, — and not for any other reason. Rudrani was staying 
then, wearing a surpassing form. Thereupon through the 
divine energy of the goddess my left eye was burnt and 
seemed to be covered with dust, and its lustre became tawny. 
Then I, going to another spacious peak of the mountain, 
became engaged in silently observing a mighty vow. On 
my term of restraint having been complete, that lord of the 
gods — Mahe£wara — with a gratified heart addressed me, 
saying, — O righteous one, O thou of fair vows, I am well- 
pleased with this asceticism of thine. I also had observed 
this vow ; and thou also, O lord of riches, hast done the same. 
A third person there is none that practiseth such a vow. 
This vow is hard to perform, and formerly it was I that 
introduced it. Therefore, O mild one, O lord of riches, do 
thou contract friendship with me. And thou hast conquered 
me by thy penances. Therefore, O sinless one, be thou my 
friend. And this thy left eye hath been burnt through the 
energy of the goddess, and hath turned tawny in consequence 
of having seen the grace of the goddess ; so thy name shall 
ever be Ek&kshipingali. — Then at Sankara’s command I have 
obtained the privilege of companionship (with him). Having 
come here I have heard of thy evil designs. Do thou then 
desist from this impious course, tending to sully thy line. 
The celestials along with the sages are pondering over the 
means of compassing thy death. — * Thus addressed, the Ten- 
necked one, with his eyes reddened in wrath, rubbing his 
hands and knashing his teeth, said, — *0 messenger, I have 
learnt what thou hast uttered. Neither thou nor this brother 
of mine by whom thou hast been despatched, (shall live) ; 
nor doth the keeper of riches say what is for my good. And 
the fool makes me hear the circumstance of his having made 
friends with Mahe£wara. I shall never forgive what thou 
hast said. Up to this I had borne him, considering that he, 
being my elder brother anc| as such my superior should not 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1598 



RAMA YANA . 



be slain by me. But now hearing his (utterances), even this 
is my resolve. Depending upon the might of my arms, I 
shall conquer the three worlds. On his account solely I 
shall on the instant despatch the four LokapSlas to the abode 
of Death/ Having said this, Lanka's lord killed the emissary 
with his sword and made him over to the wicked RSkshasas 
for being eaten. Then, having performed SwastyAyana,* 
RSvana, ascending his car, went to where the lord of riches 
was, bent on conquering the three worlds/ 1 



SECTION XIV. 



tfc A 

.Accompanied by his six counsellors — Mahodara and 
Prahasta, M&richa, Suka and S&rana, and the heroic 
Dhumriksha — eager for encounter— the graceful RJvana, 
elated with his strength sallied out, as if consuming all 
creatures with his wrath. And leaving behind cities and 
streams and hills and woods and groves, he in a moment 
came to the mountain — Kailua. And hearing that wicked- 
minded lord of R&kshasas, breathing high spirits, had arrived 
at the mount in company with his counsellors, the Yakshas 
could not stay before that Raksha, — and knowing ‘This one 
is the king's brother,' — went to where the lord of riches was. 
Going to him they in full related all about the doings of his 
brother. And on being permitted by the bestower of 
treasures, they went out for battle. And then, like unto the 
agitation of the ocean, there took place a mighty ferment of 
the forces of the Nairita king, as if making the mountain 

* A religious cerempny performed for propitiating any deity or malign 
star, and so warding off an impending disaster, or bringing luck to any under- 
taking. This has obtained to this day in Hindu society. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTA RA KA NDAM. 



*599 



tremble. And then there took place an encounter between 
the Yakshas and the RSkshasas ; and therein the councillors 
of the Rlkshasa were smitten fiercely. And finding his forces 
in that plight, Da^agriva set up full many a cheerful shout 
and in wrath began to speak. Of the councillors of the 
RSLkshasa-chief, each coped with a thousand Yakshas. And 
then struck with maces and clubs and swords and darts and 
tomaras 9 the Ten-necked one dived into (that deep) of a 
host. And rendered inert and sore assailed, Da^nana was 
deprived of his movements with vollies of weapons remembl- 
ing torrents of rain. And albeit drenched with blood 
streaming down in hundreds of torrents, he like a mountain 
flooded with a downpour, being wounded with the weapons 
of the Yakshas, —doth not betray any smart. And that high- 
souled one, raising up his mace resembling the rod itself of 
Time, entered into that army, despatching Yakshas to the 
abode of Yama. And as a flaming fire burneth up an 
extensive sward of grass stocked with dry fire-wood, he 
began to consume that Yaksha army. And as the wind 
scattereth clouds, the small remnant of Yaksha army was 
scattered by the redoubtable councillors (of RSvana) — 
Mahodara, Suka, etc. And some were wounded, and (spme) 
broken down, and (some) measured their lengths on the 
ground in the encounter, and other Yakshas deprived of 
their arms in the field, being fatigued, sank down, embracing 
each other, even as banks drop down, on being worn away by 
water. And no room was left (in the sky) in consequence of 
its being thronged by hosts of sages ; and warriors, wounded 
and rushing for conflict, and (finally) ascending heaven.* 
And finding the foremost Yakshas endowed with great 
strength give way, the mighty-armed lord of riches despatched 
(other) Yakshas. In the meantime, O R5ma, a Yaksha named 

* The idea of the author is : 'The welkin was thronged with sages as 
well as warriors, who swelled the ranks of the sages stationed in the sky, by 
ascending heaven after having fallen in fight.” — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAM A YANA . 



1600 

Sanyodhakantaka, accompanied by an extensive force and a 
large number of vehicles, — on being despatched, rushed (on 
the foe). And wounded in the conflict (by Sanyodhakantaka) 
with his discus, as if by Vishnu hismself, M^richa toppled 
down to the ground from the mountain, like unto a planet 
whose merit hath waned, And in a moment regaining his 
consciousness and resting (for a while), that night-ranger 
fought with the Yaksha ; and thereat, on being defeated, he* 
fled. Then (R&vana) entered within the gate -way (of the 
palace), garnished with gold, and decked with lapises and 
silver, And thereat, O king, the w r arder named Suryyabh&nu 
prevented the night-ranger — Da^agriva — as he was entering. 
And albeit prevented, the night-ranger entered in. And 
when, O R&ma, that RSkshasa was prevented, he did not stay. 
And then struck by that Yaksha with the gate- way uprooted, 
he, discharging blood in streams, looked like a hill w'ith 
minerals running on it. And hit with that gate-way resembl- 
ing a mountain-summit in splendour, that hero did not sustain 
any injury, on account of the boon he had received from the 
Self-sprung. And on being struck by the same gate-way, 
the Yaksha ceased to be seen, his body having then been 
consumed to ashes. And witnessing the prowess of the 
Raksha, all began to flee ; and then they afflicted with affright, 
fatigued, and with pale faces, entered into rivers and caves, 
leaving their arms behind.” 

* The Yaksha, that is* 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTA RA KA ND A M. 



1601 



SECTION XV. 

O ee * n g the foremost of the Yakshas by thousands 
undergoing trepidation, the lord of riches spoke unto a mighty 
Yaksha — Manichara, — ‘O foremost of Yakshas, slay the wicked 
Ravana, set on sin ; and do thou (thus) become the refuge of 
those heroic Yakshas, who are carrying on the conflict*' 
Thus addressed, the mighty-armed and invincible Manibhadra,- 
surrounded by four thousand Yakshas began the fight. And 
attacking the Rakshasas with maces and clubs and bearded 
darts, and with darts tomoras and bludgeons, the Yakshas 
rushed at (their adversaries). And fast safely whirling about 
like hawks, they fought fiercely. And (some) said, Well, give 
me battle/ and (others), ‘l don't want/ and (others, again), 
‘Let me have (fight)'. And then the celestials and the 
Gandharvas and the sages studying the Vedas, beholding the 
great encounter, were filled with mighty amazement. And a 
thousand of the Yakshas were slain by Prahasta in the 
conflict ; and another thousand of capable warriors were slain by 
Mahodara. And O king, in the twinkling of an eye Maricha, 
waxing wroth and eagar for encounter brought down two 
thousand (of enemy’s soldiers). Where is the candid-coursing 
fight of the Yakshas and where the fight of the Rakshas by 
help of the power of illusion ; and therefore in that battle 
the advantage was on the side of the Rakshasas. And Dhumra- 
cksha, confronting Manibhadra in the mighty conflict hit him 
at the chest with a bludgeon ; but he did not move thereat. 
And then Manibhadra dealt the Rclkshasa a blow with his mace ; 
and thereat Dhumracksha smit at the head fell down senseless 
(on the ground). And seeing Dhumrackhsa w’ounded and 
down, bathed in blood, the Ten-necked one rushed at Mani- 
bhadra in the encounter. And then that foremost of Yakshas 
hit Da£anana with three darts as he was rushing in wrath. 
And on being thus hit, (Ravana) struck at Manibhadra's 
201 



Digitized by Google 




1602 



RAM AY AN A. 



head ; and at that stroke his crown was depressed at one 
side. And from that day forth that Yaksha remained with 
his head hollow on one side. And on the high-souled Mani- 
bhadra having been baffled, a great uproar, O king, rose in 
that mountain. And then at a distance, the lord of riches, 
mace in hand, accompanied by Sukra and Praushthapada 
and Padma and Sanka saw (RSvana) in the field. And 
seeing his brother in the encounter with his glory obscured 
through the curse (he had ere this come by), the intelligent 
(lord of Yakshas) spoke in words worthy of the line of his 
grand-father, — ‘ As, O wicked-minded one, thou desistest 
not, albeit forbidden by me, thou shalt, afterwards attain- 
ing the fruit of this, and repairing to hell, know (the 
fate that followeth thee). That perverse one, that through 
ignorance having drunk poison, neglects to adopt proper 
measures, knoweth the consequence of his act ultimately. 
The gods have set their face against thee on account of 
a certain misdeed of thine ; and having for this, been 
reduced to this condition, thou dost not understand things. 
He that dishonoreth his father and mother* and spiritual 
preceptor, reapeth the fruit of his act on coming under the 
sway of the sovereign of the dead. Having regard that 
this body is uncertain, that foolish person, that doth not 
acquire asceticism, dying goeth the way that he deserveth. 
The mind of a perverse man doth not willingly incline 
towards good ; and he reapeth as he soweth. In this 
world people, making their own good fortune and beauty, 
strength, sons, wealth and valor, gain these by virtue of 
their pious acts. Being given to such iniquitous acts, 
thou wilt go to hell ; and thy designs being such, I will not 
hold parley with thee. Honest people should act carefully 
in connection with the wicked/ — Thus reprimanded by him, 
his (R&vana’s) councillors, headed by Maricha, on being 
struck, took to their heels. Then Da^agriva on being 

* Unless he serveth his parents, his heart doth not incline to piety. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1603 



struck in the head with the mace by the lord of Yakshas, 
did not move from his place. And then, O Rama, the Yaksha 
and Rakshasa, smiting each other in mighty encounter, 
did not get bewildered or experience fatigue. And then 
the bestower of riches discharged a fiery weapon at him ; 
and thereat the lord of Rakshasas resisted it with a Varuna 
weapon. And then the Rakshasa king entered upon 
Rakshasi-illusion ; and began to assume a thousand 
shapes for compassing the destruction (of his adversary). 
And the Ten-necked one (successively) assumed the shapes 
of a tiger, a boar, a cloud, a hill, the ocean, a tree, a 
Yaksha and a Daitya. Thus he wore full many forms and 
he was not visible in his native shape. And then, O Rama, 
seizing a mighty weapon the Ten-necked one, whirling 
the same, brought that redoubtable mace down on the head 
of the bestower of riches. Thus smitten by him, the 
lord of wealth, baffled, toppled down to the earth covered 
with blood like an agoka whose roots have been hewn 
away. Thereat Padma and other Nidhi deities, sur- 
rounding the granter of wealth, raised him up and brought 
him to the Nandana wood. Conquering the bestower of 
wealth, the lord of Rakshasas, with a delighted heart, posses- 
sed himself of his Pushpaka, the car, as a sign of victory ; 
furnished with golden pillars, gateways set with lapises, 
covered with networks of pearls, having trees yielding 
the fruits of all seasons, endowed with the celerity of thought, 
ranging everywhere at will, wearing forms at pleasure, 
capable of coursing in the sky, with golden and jewelled 
stairs, and daises of polished gold, — the vehicle of the gods — 
undeteriorating, bringing delight to the mind and sight ; 
wonderous exceedingly : painted with images designed to 
fill the mind with reverence,— constructed by Brahma, 
containing all objects of desire, charming and nonpariel 
not cold and not yet hot, granting gratification in every 
season, and graceful to the view. And ascending that 



Digitized by CjOoq le 




1604 



RAM AY AN A. 



(car) coursing at will, won by his prowess, that utterly 
wicked one, out of swelling insolence, deemed himself master 
of the three worlds. And having vanquished the deity 
Vaisravana, he descended from Kaila^a. And having by 
his energy obtained the victory, the powerful night-ranger 
wearing a bright diadem and necklace, and seated on that 
superb car, — appeared radiant in his court like Fire himself.” 



SECTION x;vi. 



O Rama, having, vanquished his brother, the lord of 
riches, the king of Rakshasas went to the great wood of 
reeds, where Mahasena was born. And the Ten-necked 
one saw the great golden wood of reeds. Furnished with 
networks of solar rays, and appearing like a second Sun, 
and ascending the mountain, he was surveying the heart 
of the forest, when, O Rama, Pushpaka was (suddenly) de- 
prived of its motion. And the lord of Rakshasas, could 
not comprehend how the car which had been so made as to 
course in accordance with the wish of the rider, could 
have its course impeded ; and thereat he in company with 
his councillors thought, Wherefore doth not this Pushpaka 
course at my desire over this mountain ? Whose act is 
this V Thereat Maricha — foremost of intelligent ones — said, 
— ' That Pushpaka doth not course cannot, sire, be without 
cause ; or it may be that in consequence of Pushpaka not 
having borne any other than the bestower of riches, it 
hath ceased its course not having the lord of wealth for its 
rider.’ As they were speaking thus, that attendant of 
Bhava, Nandi, terrific, of — yellow black hue, dwarfish, 
frightful, with his head shaven, having short arms, and stout, 
— coming up to them, said ( this). And the lordly Nandi, 



Digitized by LjOOQle 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1605 



undaunted, addressed the sovereign of the R&kshasas, 
saying : ‘Desist thou O Ten-necked one ; Sankara sporteth 
in the mountain ; and (now ) He is incapable of being 
approached by every one — birds, serpents and Yakshas ; 
gods, Gandharvas and Rakshas ?’ Hearing Nandi’s speech, 
(Ravana), wrought up with wrath, his eyes coppery, and his 
ear-rings shaking, leapt down from Pushpaka. And saying, ‘who 
is this Sankara ?’ he came down to the base of the mount, and 
beheld there Nandi stationed at the side of that deity, support- 
ing himself on his flaming dart, resembling a second Sankara. 
And seeing that one having the face of a monkey, the Rakshasa, 
deriding him, burst out into laughter, and seemed as if a mass 
of clouds were sending roars. Thereat, growing enraged, the 
reverend Nandi — Sankara’s other body — spoke unto that Ra- 
ksha — The Ten-necked one — present there ; ‘As O Da^nana, 
deriding me for my monkey-form, thou hast indulged in a 
laughter resembling the bursting of thunder, so monkeys endow- 
ed with prowess, and possessed of my form and energy shall 
be born for compassing the destruction of thy race. And 
armed with teeth and claws, and fierce and furnished with 
the fleetness of thought, and mad for encounter, and bursting 
with vigor, and resembling moving mountains. And being 
born, they shall crush thy high pride and power along 
with thy courtiers and sons. But, O night-ranger, I can 
even now end thee quite ; yet I must not slay thee for thou 
hast ere this been slain by thine acts.’ When that high- 
souled god had spoken thus celestial kettle-drums sounded 
and a blossomy shower rained from the sky. But without 
heeding Nandi’s speech, that highly powerful one — Da9an- 
ana — coming to the mountan, said, — ‘ O Gopati, I will even 
uproot this mountain, for whom Pushpaka was deprived of 
its motion as I was journeying. It must be known by what 
influence Bhavaswara sporteth here king-like. He doth not 
know that an occasion of fear hath presented itself ?’ Having 
said this, O Rama, Ravana seizing the mountain with his 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




i6o6 



RAMA YANA, 



arms, lifted it up at once ; and then the mountain trem- 
bled greatly. And in consequence of the mountain shaking 
the attendants of the deity (dwelling in it) also shook. And 
Parvati also trembled and embraced Mahe^wara. And then, 
G RSma, Mahadeva — foremost of the deities — even Hara, 
as in sport pressed the mount with his great toe. And thereat 
his arms, resembling blocks of stone felt the shock and 
then there the counciilors of that Raksha were struck with 
amaze. And the Raksha, from wrath and the pain felt in 
his arms, set up a shout that shook the entire triune world. 
And his councillors considered it as the concussion of the 
thunder at the universal disruption. And then the celestials 
with Indra at their head shook on their way ; and the sea 
was wild and the mountains shook. And Yakshas and 
Vidyadharas and Siddhas asked, ‘ What is this.’ ‘ Do 
thou propitiate Uma’s lord — the blue-throated Mahadeva ; for, 
G Da^anana, save him thy refuge see we none in this matter. 
Bowing thyself down, do thou seek him as thy shelter. 
Then the kind Sankara, on being gratified, will confer on thee 
his favor. 1 Thus accosted by his councillors, the Ten- 
faced one, bowing down to him having the bull for his 
standard, began to hymn him with various soma hymns ; and 
the Raksha passed away a good thousand years in 
lamentations. And thereat that Lord Mahadeva, pleased, 
set free the hands of Da^anana stationed at the top of the 
mount, and O Rama, addressed him, saying, ‘ O Da^nana, 
pleased am I with thee on account of thy hymns. And as 
in consequeuce of thy arms having been hurt by the mountain, 
thou hast uttered a terrific yell, which struck horror into 
the three worlds and put them shaking, therefore, O King, 
thy name shall be Rivana. And deities and men and Yakshas 
and others living on earth shall call thee R&vana — terror to 
creatures. So, O Paulastya, which way thou wishest, and 
permitted by me, O Lord of Rakshasas, go thou.’ Thus 
accosted by Sambhu, Lanka’s lord said of himself. ‘ If thou 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANb/iM. 



1607 



art pleased with me, grant me a boon, who ask thee for 
it. T have already obtained a boon, bestowing on me im- 
munity from death at the hands of gods, Gandharvas and 
Danavas; and Rakshasas and Guyhakas and Nagas; and 
others also that are of more than oridinary strength. Man 
count I not O god : They, I deem, are insignificant. I have 
also, O destroyer of Tripura, received a long lease of life 
from Brahma. Now I wish to pass the remainder of my 
days in peace : and do thou grant me a weapon/ Thus ad- 
dressed by him, (Ravana,) Sankara gave him an exceedingly 
effulgent sword, famed as Chandrahasa ; and the master of 
spectres then also granted him peace for the rest of his life. 
And making (the sword) over to him, Sambhu said, — ‘ Thou 
must not disregard this. If disregarded, it will for certain 
come (back) to me V Having thus received his name from 
Mahegwara, Ravana, saluting Mahadeva, ascended Push- 
paka. And then, O Rama, Ravana, began to go round 
the earth. And opposed at places, by the heroic Kshatriyas en- 
dowed with energy and irrepressible in fight, who refused 
submission, he exterminated them along with their retainers ; 
while other men of wisdom, knowing the Raksha to be invin- 
cible, said unto the Rakshasa elated with strength, — “ We have 
been conquered?” 



SECTION XVII. 



And then, O King, the mighty-armed Ravana rang- 
ing the earth, came to Himav&n and began to go round it. And 
it came to pass that there he saw a damsel wearing a dark 
deer-skin and matted locks, leading the life of a saint, 
and flaming like a celestial. And seeing the girl observing 
high vows, endowed with beauty, he, with his soul overwhelmed 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




i6o8 



RAM AY ANA. 



with lust asked her, laughing. 1 How is it, O amiable one, 
that thou actest thus contrary to thy youth ? This course 
of life surely doth not befit thy beauty. Thy loveliness, 
O timid one, is peerless, capable of maddening folk with 
desire. It doth not behove thee to lead an ascetic mode of 
life, — this would suit an old person. Whose daughter art 
thou, O gentle lady ? And what is this (vow) that thou 
practisest ? And O fair faced wrench, who is thy husband ? 
He who hath thee for his wife, is, O timorous one, hath 
religious merit on earth. Tell all about this to me who ask for 
it. For whom dost thou put thyself to trouble ?’ Thus ac- 
costed by Ravana, that illustrious girl, having asceticism for 
wealth, having received him hospitably in due form, said, 
‘My sire is named Ku£odwaja — a Brahmarshi of immeasurable 
energy, son unto Vrihaspati, endowed with grace, and like 
unto Vrihaspati himself in intelligence. And while that high- 
sould one was engaged in the daily study of the Vedas, I 
was born as his word-impregnated daughter, named Vedavati. 
When the gods and the Gandharvas and the Yakshas, Raksha- 
sas, and Pannagas, coming to my sire asked for me, 
O foremost of Rakshasas, my father did not bestow me on 
any one of them. And I shall tell thee the reason thereof ; 
listen, O long-armed one. My father’s intended son-in-law 
was even Vishnu — sovereign of the celestials, and the lord 
of the triune world ; and my father would not bestow me on 
any other. And hearing this, a certain king of the Daityas, 
named Sumbhu — proud, of his prowess was wrought up with 
wrath, and one night as my sire was on bed, that wicked one 
slew him. Thereat my forlorn mother, of exalted rjghteous- 
ssen embracing my father’s body entered into fire. Then 
wishing to realize my father’s wish touching Narayana, I have 
fixed my heart even upon him. Having made this promise, I 
have deen carrying on rigid austerities. Thus, O foremost of 
R'ikshasas. I have related unto thee everything. Narayana 
si my husband, and not any one else than that best of male 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



i6og 



beings ; and desirous of having Nar§yana I have adopted 
severe restraints. I know thee, O king. Go thou, O son 
of Paulastya. By virtue of my asceticism I know all that 
takes place in these three regions/ Thereat descending from 
the front of his car, Ravana, afflicted with the shafts of Kan- 
darpa, again addressed that girl, observant of a mighty vow, 
k O thou of shapely hips, in as much as such is thy intent, 
thou must be very proud. O thou having the eyes of a 
yo\ing antelope, accumulation of religeous merit suits old 
pec^ple. Thou, furnished with every perfection, should not 
talkvthus. Thou art the paragon in these three worlds. Thy 
youth waxeth away. I am the lord of Lanka, O gentle lady, 
known as Dagagriva. Be thou my wife, and enjoy pleasures 
according to thy desire. Who is he whom thou callest Vishnu ? 
O mild one, neither in prowess, nor in asceticism, nor in en- 
joyment, nor in strength, is he my equal, whom, O damsel, 
thou seekest/ Thus accosted, Vedavati said unto the 
night-ranger ‘Do not say so’ in respect of Vishnu, lord 
of this triune sphere, bowed down unto by all creatures. 
Save and except thee alone, who, that is intellegent, crieth 
down (Narayaya), O King of Rakshasas/ Thus addressed 
there by Vedavati, the night-ranger seized the girl by the 
hair. Thereat Vedavati, wroth, cut off her hair with her 
hand transformed into a sword. And then, flaming 
up in ire and as if consuming the night-ranger, she, pre- 
paring a funeral pyre, hastened to make away with herself. 
“Thou abject, having been outraged by thee I wish not to 
live. Therefore,- O Raksha, I will enter into fire in thy very 
presence. And as I have in this world been dishonored 
by thee thou art nefarious. I shall .again be born to com- 
pass thy destruction. It lieth not in a female to slay 
a male intent on sin ; and if I utter a curse, it shall cost my 
asceticism. But if I have done anything, given away any 
thing, offered obtations unto the fire, then I shall be the 
chaste daughter of some virtous person, albeit unborn of 
. 202 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




i6io 



RAM AY AN A. 



any female vessel.* Having delevered herself thus, she 
entered into the flaming fire ; and thereat a celestial shower 
of blossoms rained all around from heaven. O Lord, this 
is she that hath been born as the daughter of king Janaka,— 
thy wife, O mighty-armed one. Thou art the eternal Vishnu. 
The enemy, endowed with the splendour of a hill, formerly 
that had been slain through the wrath (of Vedavati), hath 
now been slain by her, by help of thine superhuman prowess. 
And this one of eminent righteousnesss would again spring 
up on earth like a flame from a field furrowed by the 
plough. This one named Vedavati was born in the Krita age ; 
and in the TretSl age, for compassing the destruction of that 
Raksha, she was born in the Maithila line of the high-souled 
Janaka,” 



SECTION XVI I f. 



W ken Vedavati had entered into fire, Ravana, as- 
cending Pushpaka, began to range the earth. And 
coming to U^iraviga, R&vana saw a king (named) 
Marutta, sacrificing along with the deities. And a righ- 
teous Brahmarshi named Sanwartta, the very brother of 
Vrihashpati, officiated at the sacrifice accompanied by the 
deities. And seeing that Raksha invincible by reason of 
the boon he had received, the deities, apprehensive of 
being worsted by him, assumed the forms of beasts. And 
Indra became a peacock and the king of righteousness, 
a crow, and the bestower of riches a lizard, and Varuna 
a swan ; and, O slayer of foes, others also became other 
beasts. And then Ravana entered into that sn orifice 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1611 



like an unclean dog. And then coming up to the king, 
RSlvana — lord of Rakshasas — said : ‘Give me battle, or 

say,—/ am defeated .* Whereat king Marutta asked* 
him — ‘Who art thou* ? And R&vana laughing, in con- 
tempt said, — ‘O king, I am delighted, that lacking curio- 
sity, thou dost not dishonour Ravana, younger brother 
unto the bestower of riches. What other man is there 
in these three regions that knoweth not the might of 
me, who, conquering my brother, has got possession of 
this car/ Thereat Marutta spoke unto Ravana, saying, — 
‘Blessed for sooth art thou, by whom thy elder brother 
hath been vanquished in fight ; and a person so praise- 
worthy there is not in the three worlds. An act, that is 
divorced from righteousness and that is reprehended by 
people, can never be praiseworthy. Having committed 
a foul act, plumest thou upon thy having vanquished thy 
brother ? And practising what piety hadst thou a-fortune 
received the boon ? I had never before heard the like of 
what thou sayest. But O perverse one, stay now. Living 
thou shalt not back. To-day with my sharpened shafts 
shall I despatch thee to the abode of Yama/ Then taking 
up his bow and arrows, that king of men went out for 
encounter ; but Samavartta stood in the way. Arid that 
great sage said unto Marutta words informed with affection 
‘If thou hear my speech, thou shouldst not fight. If this 
Mahe9wara-sacrifice should remain incomplete, it wil 
burn up thy dynasty. Where is the fight of one initiated 
in a sacrifice ? And where is the passion of one ini- 
tiated in a sacrifice? And victory is ever uncertain ; 
and the RSkshasa is difficult to vanquish. And 
thereupon, the lord of Earth — Marutta— desisted in # con- 
sonance with the instructions of his spiritual preceptor ; and 
composed addressed himself to completing the sacrifice, 
giving up his bow with the arrow set. And thereat consider- 
ing him as defeated, Suka proclaimed this all round; and 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




l6l2 



RAM AY AN A. 



from delight cried aloud, ‘Victory unto Ravana V And then 
devouring the Maharshis that were present at the place of 
sacrifice, Ravana, satiated with their blood, again went to 
the earth. On Ravana having departed, the deities, inhabiting 
the etherial regions — Indra etc. — assuming their proper 
forms, addressed those creatures. And from joy Indra spoke 
unto the purple-plumed peacock, — ‘Pleased am I with thee 
thou righteous one. * No fear shall spring to thee from 
serpents ; and thy plumage shall be furnished with an hundred 
eyes. And when I shall shower, thou shalt be filled with glee 
as a token of my satisfaction with thee/ Thus did Indra — 
chief of celestials, confer a boon on the peacock. Formerly, 
O king, the peacock's wings had one unvaried blue. Having 
received the boon, the peacock departed. Then O Rama, 
the king of righteousness said unto the crow, seated in front 
of the sacrificial apartment ‘O bird, I am well pleased with 
thee. Listen to my words as I utter them. As I have 
been pleased with thee, thou shalt without doubt, enjoy 
immunity from the various ailments to which the birds 
are subject. And O bird, from my curse fear of death 
shall not approach thee ; and thou shalt exist so long 
as people do not slay thee. And those men residing in my 
dominion, being smitten with hunger, shall be refreshed 
along with thy relations, when thou hast eaten and 
been refreshed/ Then Varuna addressed that lord of birds 
the swan ranging the waters of the Ganga,— -‘Listen to my 
words fraught with joy, thy hue shall be charming, mild, 
and like unto the lunar disc ; and it shall be beautiful, resemb- 
ling the sheen of spotless foam. And approaching my 
person thou shalt ever be beautiful to behold ; and thou 
shalt, f as a sign of my gratification, attian unparalleled 
complacence/ Formerly, O R£ma, swans had not a hue 
of one unvaried whiteness. Their wings ended in, blue, 
and their breasts wore the spotless hue of tender grass. And 
then Vai^ravana addressed the chameleon as it was stationed 



Digitized by 



Google 




UTTARAKANDAM . 



1613 

at the mountain : ‘ Thy hue shall be gold-gleaming. Pleased 
am I with thee. Thy undeteriorating head shall be ever 
gold-hued. And this golden hue of thine shall proceed from 
my gratification ?* Having thus conferred boons on them at 
that festal place, the celestials, along with the king, ( on 
the sacrifice ) having ended, went to their abode. 



SECTION XIX. 



JJaving vanquished Marutta, that lord of Rakshasas— 
the Ten-faced one — eager for encounter, began to range the 
capitals of the foremost monarchs ( of the earth ). And 
coming to the most powerful crowned heads ( in the world ) 
resembling Mahendra and Varuna, the Rakshasa king said : 
i Give me battle ; or declare — we have been defeated. This 
I am resolved upon. Otherewise there is no escape for you ?’ 
Thereat those wise kings, possessed of great strength, and ever 
abiding by righteousness, being frightened ( at Ravana’s in- 
timidation ), took counsel of each other. And knowing the 
superior strength of the foe, they said, — We have been defeated/ 
Dushkanta, O child, and Suratha, and Gadhi, and Gaya 
and king Pururava — all these kings said : ‘ We have been 
defeated/ And then Ravana — sovereign of the Rakshasas— 
presented himself before Ayodhya, governed by Anaranya, like 
Amaravati ruled by Sakra. And coming to that foremost of men 
— king like unto Purandara himself in prowess, Ravana said,— 
‘ Give me battle ; or say I have been defeated. This is 
my mandate/ The lord of Ayodhy&, on hearing the words of 
that wicked-minded one, Anaranya, enraged, addressed the 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAMA YANA. 



1614 

Rakshasa-chief, saying, — ‘O king of Rakshasas, I will give 
thee combat, stay thou. At once prepare for fight, and I also 
shall go and prepare myself/ And when he had heard everything 
( regarding Ravana ), the forces of that foremost of kings 
that had been intended, for conquering (Ravana), sallied 
forth ready for bringing about the destruction of the Raksha, — • 
ten thousand elephants, a niyuta horse, and many thousands 
of cars and infantry, O best of men ; and, that host 
consisting of infantry and cars, marched for encounter, 
covering up the earth. And then, O thou proficient in fight, 
there took place a mighty and wonderful encounter between 
king Anaranya and that lord of Rakshasas. And that host, of 
the king encountering the forces of Ravana, were extinguished 
like unto clarified butter thrown into the ( sacrificial) fire. And 
having faught valorously for a long time, the remnant of 
the royal forces, suddenly coming in contact with the flaming 
Rakshasa ranks, were destroyed like unto swarms of locusts 
entering into fire. And he saw the mighty army of that power- 
ful monarch destroyed by the (adversary), like unto a hundred 
streams absorbed by an approaching ocean. And then himself 
drawing his bow resembling the bow itself of Sakra, that 
foremost of sovereigns, beside himself with wrath, approached 
Ravana. And brought down by Anaranya, his ( Ravana’ s ) 
councillors — Maricha, Suka, and Sarana with Prahasta, — took 
to their heels like unto dear. And then that son of the 
Ikshawaku race discharged eight hundred arrows at Ravana’ s 
head. And like unto showers pouring down on the top of 
a mountain, his shafts did not inflict any wound (on Ravana). — 
And then the king, smitten on the head with a slap by the 
enraged king of Rakshasas, dropped down from his car. 
And the king, deprived of his senses, fell down on the earth, 
with his body trembling all over ; as falls in a forest a sala 
scathed with heaven’s fire. And thereat the Raksha, laugh- 
ing, spoke unto that Ikshwaku, lord of the 'earth, — ‘ What 
is this that thou hast gathered as the fruit of thy encounter 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM . 



1615 

with me. O king, there is none in this triune sphere that 
can combat with me. Having hitherto been sunk in lunacy, 
thou hast not heard of my strength/ As he was speaking 
thus, the king, whose sounds were fast running out said : 
‘ What can I do in this matter. Verily time is incapable of 
being controlled. I have been overcome by Time ; thou art 
merely an instrument. What can I do now, when I am going 
to lose my life? I never turned away from fight; I have 
been slain fighting. But, O R&kshasa, I shall tell thee 
something in consequence of the disgrace that the Ikshw&ku 
race has met with ( to-day ). If I have practised charity, if 
I have offered oblations into fire, if I have carried on pious 
penances, if I have governed my people well, then be my 
words verified ! There shall spring in the line of the high- 
souled Ikshwaku, one named R&ma — son unto Da^aratha, 
who shall deprive thee of thy life/ As he uttered this 
imprecation, the celestial kettle-drums sounded like the 
roaring of clouds ; and blossoms showered down from the sky. 
And then, that best of kings, went to heaven ; and when that 
king had gone to the celestial regions, the Rakshasa ( also ) 
went away. 



SECTION XX. 



u A 

S the lord of Rakshasas was ranging the earth 
frightening everyone, N&rada — -foremost of ascetics, came to 
that wood mounted on a cloud. And thereupon saluting 
him, the night-ranger Ten-necked one— enquired after his 
welfare as well as the occasion of his visit. And that De- 
varshi — the exceedingly energetic Narada of immeasurable 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAM AY AN A. 



1616 

splendour, seated on the back of the cloud, addressed 
Ravana, who was stationed in Pushpaka, saying, — ‘O lord 
of Rakshasas, O placid one, O son of Vigrava, stay. I am 
well pleased with thy prowess and fame. And even as 
Vishnu had pleased me by destroying the Daityas, thou pleased 
me by harassing the Gandharvas and serpents. I will tell 
thee something. If thou wouldst hear what I have to say 
then, O child, listen heedfully as I unfold it. Why, my child, 
dost thou slay these* ; thou art incapable of being slain by 
even the celestials. All these (men) are subject to death, they 
are verily slain. The world of man is unworthy of being 
afflicted by thee who art incapable of being destroyed by 
Deities, Danavas Daityas, Yakshas, Gandharvas and 
Rakshas. Who should slay creatures, who are ever stupid 
in respect of their welfare, environed by mighty 
dangers, and encompassed by decrepitude and hundreds of 
ailments ? What sensible person can set his heart on 
slaying human beings who are everywhere beset with*, a 
perrennial stream of evils. Do not thou enfeeble those 
beings who are already enfeebled and smitten by .Divinity 
with hunger, thirst, old age etc. and who are overwhelmed 
with sorrow, and grief. O mighty-armed one, O lord of 
Rakshasas, behold man, albeit having their sense stupified, 
engaged in the pursuit of various interests, and themselves 
not understanding their own ways ;f some pass their time 
merrily with dancing and playing on musical instru- 
ments while others weep distressfully with tears streaming 
from their eyes down their cheeks. And down fallen on 
account of their attachment for their mothers and fathers and 
sons, and of their desires touching their wives and friends 
they set small store by labours having the hereafter as their 

* i. e. human beings. 

t Gati — according to the commentator, means the time of employment 
and suffering. — I think the ordinary meaning answers, and give it according- 
ly.-T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




VTTARAKANDAM . 



1617 

object. What then is the use of afflicting a race that is 
brought down ever by its own infatuation. O placid one, 
this world is verily conquered by thee. These for certain 
will have to repair to the abode of Yama. Therefore, O 
Paulastya, O captor of hostile capitals, do thou put down 
Yama. Qn him being conquered, all will doubtless be con* 
quered by thee/ Thus addressed Lanka's lofd, flaming in 
native energy* addressed Narada, laughing and saluting him, 
‘O thou that delightest in the sport of gods and Gandharvas, 
and that takest pleasure in warfare, I am ready to go to the 
nethermost regions for the purpose of conquest. And con- 
quering the three worlds, and bringing under subjection ser- 
pents and celestials I shall for ambrosia churn the nether 
regions/ Then the reverend sage Narada spoke unto the 
Ten-necked one, — Who save thee can forsooth go on that 
journey ? Verily, O irrepressible one, O destroyer of foes, 
the way leading to the city of the lord of the dead 
is difficult of access/ Thereat laughing, the Ten-faced 
one said to the saint resembling a mass of white clouds, 
‘This is done. Therefore,* O great Brahman, intent upon 
slaying the Vaiva^wata's son, I will go by this way which 
leadeth to the king — the offspring of the sun. And, O 
master, from wrath I have vowed that I will, eager for en- 
counter, O reverend one, conquer the four Lokapalas. Then 
here go I to the city of the lord of the Pitris ; and I am 
determined to compass the death of him that visiteth creatures 
with smart/ Having delivered himself thus and saluted the 
sage, he, entering the southern way with his councillors, 
proceeded along. And the exceedingly energetic Narada — 
best of Brahmans — resembling a smokeless fire, remaining rapt 
for a while, began to reflect ; — ‘How can (Ravana) conquer 
Time who, when its life waneth, righteously visiteth with 
affliction the time, sphere with Indra, fraught with mobile 

* i. e. As thou hast commanded me. 

203 



Digitized by Google 




i6i8 



RAM AY AM A. 



and immobile. How can this lord of Rakshasas, of himself, 
go to him who, resembling another fire, beareth to the 
gifts and acts (of persons), — that high-souled one of whom 
attaining consciousness, people put forth their activity ; and 
afflicted with the fear of whom these three worlds fall away ? 
How can (Ravana) subdue him who ordaineth things both 
great and small, who meteth rewards and punishments for 
good and bad acts, and who himself hath conquered the three 
worlds ? Resorting* to what other means shall Ravana secure 
(victory) ? I am curious about it : To Yama’s abode shall I 
go for witnessing the encounter between Yama and the 
RSkshasa.” 



SECTION XXI. 



Having reflected thus, that foremost of Vipras endowed 
with fleet vigor, bent his steps towards the abode of Yama, 
for the purpose of relating to him all that had taken place. 
And there (he) saw that god — Yama — sitting in front of fire ; 
and offering into it the good and evil fruits of their actions.f 
And seeing the Maharshi NSrada arrive there, Yama 
offering him arghya according to the ordinance, addressed 
him saying, when he was seated at his ease : ‘O Devarshi, 



* Explains the commentator : 4 Time hath every thing under its control. 
Like the all-enclosing space, time pervades all that is. This being so, resort- 
ing what transcending Time, shall R&vana obtain victory over it.” 

f Ordaining happiness and misery to the lives of people according to 
their acts.’ — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





UTTARVKANDAM . 



1619 

is it well with thee ? And doth virtue deteriorate.’* And, 
why, 0 thou honored of deities, and Gandharvas, dost thou 
come ?’ Thereat the reverened sage, Narada, said ; Hearken. 
I shall tell (thee) ; and (after hearing me out) do thou 
what is fit. O king of the Pitris, here cometh the night- 
ranger named tea-necked, for bringing thee under his sway 
— thee who art incapable of being conquered. And, 

O master, for this reason it is that I have come hither 
hastily, — doubtful what shall befall thee who hast the rod 
for thy weapon. In the meanwhile they saw the Raksha’s 
car approach from afar, flaming and like unto the ray- 
furnished (one) risen. And dispelling the gloom of that 
region with the effulgence of Pushpaka, that exceedingly 
powerful (Rakshasa) came forward. And the mighty-armed 
ten-necked one all around saw creatures reaping the conse - 
quences of their fair and foul acts. And there he saw Yama’s 
soldiery along with Yama’s followers, fierce-forms, grim-visaged 
and terrific. And he saw coporeal beings undergoing tor- 
ments and pain, and emitting loud cries and sharp shrieks ; 
preyed on by worms and fell dogs : and uttering words 
capable of striking pain and terror into the heart (of the 
hearer) : and people swimming in the Vaitaraini profusely 
running blood ; and momentarily burning with hot sands ; 
unrighteous wights pierced in a wood of asipatra , (plunged) 
in Raurava, in the river of borate of soda ; and (cut) with 
razor-edges ; asking for drinks ; and afflicted with hunger 
and thirst ; converted into corpses, lean, woe-begone, and 
pallid with hair flowing loosely ; having dust and filth (on their 
bodies), and running about distressfully with dry forms ; — on 



* The original has: “Doth not virtue wane." This in English would imply 
the very reverse what Narada intends to say. He says : ‘Doth religion deterio- 
rate ?’ — i.e. ‘I hope, religion doth not deteriorate.’ This is an idiom and 
natural usage accounts for it,' although that usage must in the nature of 
things be based on a subtle ground of reason. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





1 620 



RAM AY AN A. 



the way saw Ravana by hundreds and by thousands. And 
Ravana also saw some in front of houses engaged in merry- 
making with songs and strai ns of instruments, — as the fruit 
of their pious acts ; and (saw) the giver of kine regailing 
themselves with milk ; the dispenser of rice, feeding on the 
same, the bestower of abodes, enjoying mansions, as the 
fruit of their several acts ; and persons living with dam- 
sels decked with gold and gems and jewels ; and other 
pious folks, flaming in their native energy, all these saw 
Ravana lord of RSkshasas* And by his might that mighty 
one delivered those that were being tormented by their 
wicked acts. And on being liberated by that Raksha — the 
ten-necked one, those creatures in a moment began to enjoy 
their release, that had come to them without thought or 
suspense. And on the dead being delivered by the magnani- 
mous Rakshasa, the guards of the dead, getting enraged, 
rushed at the Rakshasa sovereign. And there arose a mighty 
tumult from all sides ; from the heroic warriors of the king of 
righteousness rushing (all around.) And those heroes by 
hundreds and by thousands assailed (Pushpaka) with pragus , 
and bludgeons, and darts and maces, and spears and tomaras \ 
And swiftly swarming like bees, they began to break the 
seats, blocks, daises and gateways (of the car.) And in that 
conflict Pushpaka presided over by divine energy, incapable 
of being destroyed by virtue of Brahma power, being broken* 
resumed its former shape. Countless were the soldiers of 
that high-souled one consisting hundreds and thousands of 
heroic warriors, (ever) forward for fight. And according 
to the measure of their might his (Ravana^s) councillors— 
great heroes all, as well as the ten-faced one himself with 
might and main, faught with trees and crags and hundreds 
of blocks of buildings.. And those councillors of the lord 
of Rakshasas, assailed with every kind of weapons, with 
their persons bathed in blood, faught fiercely. And O large- 
armed one the exalted councillors of Yama and Ravana sore 



Digitized by 



Google 




UTTARAKANDAM. 



1621 



assailed each other with arms. And leaving the councillors 
alone the highly powerful warriors of Yama rushed against 
Da^anana* with a shower of spears. And then pierced through 
and through by those weapons, with his person covered with 
blood, the Rakshasa king appeared like a flowering Kin^uka 
in Pushpaka.f And thereat that powerful one, by virtue of 
his mastery over weapons, began to hurl darts and maces, 
pragas and spears and tomaras and crags and trees. And 
that terrific shower of trees, rocks and arms, alighted on 
the army of Yama (fighting) on the earth. And snapping 
those weapons and resisting (those vollies of) arms, they 
smote at the Rakshasa fighting alone by hundreds and thou- 
sands. And encompassing him even as clouds encompass 
mountain, they rendered (Ravana) inert by means of 
Bhindipalas and darts. And with his mail torn open, his 
anger raging fiercely, and covered with blood streaming over 
his person, he, forsaking his car, stood upon the ground. 
And then furnished with his bow and holding his shafts, 
(Ravana) regaining his senses in a short time, increased in 
energy and stood in the field like the finisher. And now 
fixing the divine Pa9upata on his bow, and saying unto 
them, 'slay ! slay V he drew that bow. And enraged, (Ravana) 
resembling Rudra himself, in fight drawing his bow to his 
car, discharged that shaft even as Sankara had discharged at 
Tripura. And the appearance of the shaft was like an ex- 
tinguishing fire in summer with smoke with flames, 
burning up a forest. And garlanded with glory that shaft 



* Ravana. 

f This simile is peculiarly appropriate and beautiful. Pushpaka, the name 
of Ravana’ s car, means composed of flowers; and this signification shining 
askance, as it were, over the direct sense of the sentence, heightens the 
delight the reader feels on imaginging the principal figure. ‘Ravana seated in 
Pushpaka, covered with blood, looked like a blossoming Kinsuka.’ — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 





1622 



RAM AY AN A. 



followed by ghosts,* in that encounter ; rushed on, burning to 
ashes the loose bushes and trees lying in its way. And burnt 
up by its energy, the most of Vaivaswata fell down in the 
field like unto banners of Mahendra. And thereat the 
Rikshasa of terrific prowess along with his councillors began 
to set up tremendous shouts ; as if making the earth tremble. 



SECTION XXII. 

U EARING his mighty shouts, that lord Vaivaswata knew 
that his adversary had gained the day and that his own 
host had been destroyed. And knowing that his forces had 
been slain, he, with his eyes crimsoned with passion hastily 
spoke unto his charioteer, ‘Bring thou my car.’ And there- 
at the charioteer brought the noble and mighty car and stood 
(there) and then that exceeding energetic one mounted the 
car. And in front (of his car) stood death, equipped with 
pragas and maces in his hands, who makes nothing 
of this entire triune world ; incapable of deterioration. And 
beside (him) was the rod of Time in its native from — the divine 
instrument of Yama like unto a flaming fire on account of 
its own energy. And then on beholding Time, infuriated, 
tending to strike terror into all creatures, was agitated the 
triune universe, and trembling over took the denizons of 
heaven. And the charioteer urged on the steeds posses- 
sed of graceful splendour ; and arrived where the lord of 
R&kshasas was posted. And in a moment those horses 

* The instrument being Siva's, it naturally was followed by ghosts , as his 
attendants. — T. 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




UTTARAKANDAM . 



1623 

like unto thought (in celerity,) and resembling the steeds 
themselves of Hari, took Yama where the warfare had already 
begun. And seeing the frightful car in that aspect with 
Death present in it, the ministers of the Rakshasa monarch 
at once took to their heels. And in consequence of their 
being comparatively inferior in point of strength they were 
deprived of their senses, and afflicted with fear ; and saying, 
‘Here we are not equal to fighting* they went their way. 
But seeing that car capable of striking terror into folks, the 
Ten-necked did not experience any agitation, nor did fear 
enter his heart. And approaching R&vana, Yama, enraged, 
discharged spears and tomaraSj and began to pierce RSv^na's 
marrow. But Ravana, without, at all feeling any smart, 
began to shower arrows on Vaivaswata’s vehicle, resembling 
a downpour caused by clouds. And again at his spacious 
breast, that Rakshasa who had undergone slender injury, 
could not resist, (Yama’s arms) with hundreds of mighty 
darts hurled. And in this way that destroyer of foes — Yama 
fought for seven nights with various arms ; until at length 
his enemy was driven back and deprived of his senses. And 
then, O hero, there took place mighty onset between Yama 
and the Rakshasa both eager for victory and both never 
tiring of fight. And celestials and Gandharvas and 
Siddhas, and the supreme saints, placing Prajapati at their 
head, presented themselves at the fight. And the en- 
counter that then took place between that foremost of 
of Rakshasas and the lord of the Dead was like the univer- 
sal upheaval. And stretching his bow resembling in splean- 
dour the thunderbolt of Indra, he discharged arrows covering 
up the sky. And he smote Death with four, the (Yama's) 
charioteer with seven, and swiftly struck Yama in the marrow 
with hundreds and thousands of shafts. And then from 
forth Yama’s mouth there issued darted flames with his teeth 
mixed with smoke, the fire of his fury. And witnessing 
this wonder in the presence of the deities and Danavas, 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




RAM AY AN A. 



1624 

both Death and Time were fired with wrath and were 
filled with delight. And the Death, growing still more 
wroth, addressed Vaivaswata saying; — “Let me go. I shall 
slay this sinful R&kshasa. Even this is my native might 
this Rakshasa will be no more. Hiranyaka^ipu, the 
gracaful Nemuchi, and Shamvara, Nishandi and Dhumketu 
and Virochana’s offspring Vali, and the Daitya Shamvu 
that mighty monarchs, Vritra and Bana ; and Rajarshis 
versed in all branches of learnings and Grandharvas, and 
mighty serpents, and sages, ahd Pannagas and Yakshas, 
and swarms of Apsaras and the Earth herself containing 
vasty oceans and mountains and rivers and trees, at the 
unrolling of a Yuga — all these, O mighty monarch 
have I brought to dissolution. All these and many more 
endowed with strength and incapable of being overcome, 
were at the very sight of me compassed with peril, — 
and what is this ranger of the night ? Let me go. O thou 
cognizant of righteousness, — I shall slay this one. There is 
none that, albeit strong, can survive after having been seen 
by me. Verily this is not mine strength, — this might per- 
taineth to me by nature. O Time, if seen by me, he won’t 
live for a moment’ Hearing these words of his, the puissant 
king of righteousness spake there unto death, — ( Do thou stay. 
I myself shall slay him.’ Then with his eyes reddened that 
lord, Vaivaswata, wielded with his hand the infallible 
dart of time ; while by him lay the redoubtable noose of 
time and the mace in its native shape resembling fire and the 
thunderbolt. He, who by his very sight draweth away the 
lives of creatures, — what should be said of its touching and 
being hurled at people ? And touched by that powerful one, 
that mighty weapon, engist with flames, attained access of 
energy, and seemed to consume the Rakshasa. And in the 
field of battle, every one afflicted with fear/ ran away from 
it. And beholding Yama with his rod uplifted, the celestials 
were agitated. And on Yama being desirous of slaying 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




VTTARAKANDAM. 



162 5 



Ravana, the great-father manifesting himself spake unto 
Yama: ‘O Vaivasvvata, O mighty-armed one, O thou of 
immeasurable prowess, this certainly must not be. Thou 
shouldst not with thy rod slay the night-ranger ; for, O 
foremost of celestials, I have conferred a boon on him ; 
and thou shouldst not render false the words that I have 
uttered. Verily he, that, whether a god or a human being, 
shall falsify my words, shall render this triune universe 
false. There is no doubt about this. If this terrific weapon, 
capable of affrighting the three spheres, be discharged alike 
at friends and foes, it will destroy creatures. This rod of time, 
of immeasurable might and incapable of being resisted by 
creatures, was created by me as having the power of com- 
passing the death of all beings. Therefore, O mild one, 
thou forosooth shouldst not bring it down on Ravana’s head. If 
this alights on any one, he doth not live for a moment. 
Whether on this weapon allighting, the ten-necked does not 
die, or if he does do either way falsehood is the consequence. 
Therefore do thou keep thy uplifted weapon off Lanka’s 
lord. If thou have any care for these worlds do thou 
establish my truth.’ Thus addressed, Yama then ansewred, 
‘I rastrain this rod. Thou art our Lord. But as 

I can not slay this one who hath obtained a boon, what 
then shall I do now in the field ? Therefore shall I disappear 
from the sight of this Raksha.’ Having said this, even 
there did he vanish with his car and horses. And having 
vanquished him and distinguished his name, he again ascended 
his Pushpaka and went out of the abode of Yama. And 
with a delighted heart Vaivasvvata along with the deities 
headed by Brahma — as well as that mighty ascetic-Narada, 
went to the celestial regions.” 



204 



Digitized by LjOoq le 




1626 



RAM AY ANA. 



SECTION XXIII. 



JJaving vanquished Yama, the foremost of celestials, 
Ravana delighting in warfare, saw his adherents. And seeing 
Ravana, with his person bathed in blood, bettered by the 
weapon discharged at him, they were seized with surprise. 
And hailing him with victory, the councillors headed by 
Maricha, having been encouraged by Ravana, ascended Push- 
paka. And then the Raksha entered the regeon 
ol waters — the abode of Daityas and serpents, well protected, 
by Varuna. And arriving at Bhogavati — the city governed 
by Vasuki, he brought the serpents under subjection and 
then, delighted, bent his course to the palace — Manimayi. 
There dwelt the Nivatakavachas, who had obtained boons. 
Those Daityas were possessed of prowess and endowed with 
strength, — carrying various weapons, breathing high spirits and 
invincible in battle. And the Danavas and Rakshasas 
growing enraged fell to raving each other with darts and 
tridents, Kul^as and axes and pattigas. And as they faught 
one entire year passed away and neither side obtained 
victory or was worsted. And then that way of the triune 
sphere, that God, the undeteriorating Great-father, swiftly 
presented himself on the scene mounted on his excellent 
car. And making the Nivatakavachas desist from battle 
the ancient great-father spake in clear words — ‘Even 
the celestials and the Asuras are not able to van- 
quish this Ravana in battle ; nor can the Danavas 
backed by the gods can destroy you. Do you therefore 
turn your minds to making friends with the Rakshasa. 
All interests are forsooth the common possession of friends.’ 
Thereat Ravana made friends with the Nivatakavachas 
in the presence of Fire ; and then rejoiced greatly. And duly 
honored (by them) Da^anana passed there a year, without 
any feeling of that place being different from his own home : 
and spent his time agreeably. And having learnt there 
an hundred sorts of illusion, he directed his course to Rasa- 
tala, searching for the city of the lord of waters. And then 
going to the city named A£ma ruled by the Kalakayas, 
(Ravana) slew the Kalakayas endowed with terrific 
striength ; and then with his sword cut off his brother.in-law,* 
the husband of Surpanakha, the mighty Vidyutjibha possess- 
ed of terrific strength ; as that Rakshasa in the encounter was 
licking (the limbs of Ravana’s followers). + Having vanquished 
him, he, in a moment, destroyed four hundred Daityas. And 
then the lord of Rakshasas saw the grand abode of Varuna 
resembling a mass of white clouds, and effulgent like 
unto Kaila^a itself ; — and also saw the milk-conserving. 
Surabhi stationed there ; from the streams of whose milk 
was produced the ocean named Kshiroda.J And there 
Ravana saw the mother of kine and the foremost of bulls ; 
from whom springeth that maker of night, the mild-bea- 
ming-moon ; taking refuge under whom subsist the prime 
saints and those living on froth, the froth§ (of milk) ; and 
wherefrom sprang ambrosia as well as the Swadha of Swadha- 
subsisting ones^f, even her that goeth with human beings 
under the name of Surabhi. Having gone round this 
wonderful (cow), Ravana entered the exceedingly dreadful 
abode of Varuna) guarded by various kinds of forces. And 
then he beheld Varuna’s splendid mansion, streaming with 
hundreds of torrents, resembling a mass of autumnal clouds, 
and always wearing a delightful aspect. And killing the 
generals of the forces, after having been resisted by them, 
he addressed the warriors, saying, — ‘Do you speedily acquaint 
your king with this “ Ravana hath come here seeking 
battle.” • Do thou give him fight, or say with joined 
hands. ( I have been defeated by thee, and then thou 
hast no fear whatever ?’ In the meantime the sons and 
grandsons of the high-souled Varuna, as well as those of 
Pushkara issued forth. And they, endowed with every 
virtue, accompanied by their own forces, yoked cars 
furnished with the effulgence of the rising Sun, and coursing 
at the desire of their riders. And then there took place a 
mighty encounter capable of making people’s down stand 
on end, between the sons of the lord of waters, and those 
of the intelligent Ravana. And in a short while that entire 
host of Varuna was brought down by the highly powerful 
councillor of that Rakshasa Da^agriva. And seeing their 
own forces brought to straits in the conflict and driven 
back in the fight with networks of shafts, and down 
on the ground and seeing Ravana in Pushpaka, Varuna’s 
sons swiftly shot into the welkin with their fleet-footing cars. 
And after they had attained a station of equal vantage 
(with Ravana) in the sky,* great was the encounter that then 
took place in the sky, resembling the encounter of the 
deities and the Danavas. And turning away Ravana in 
the conflict by means of shafts resembling fire, they, ex- 
ceedingly rejoiced, emitted various shouts. And then 
Mahodara, eneraged on seeing the king sore pressed, casting 
off fear, and wrought up with rage, began to go around, 
eager for fight. And smit with his mace by Mahodara, 
Varuna’s sons coursing at will and resembling the wind (in 
velocity), dropped down to the ground. And having slain 
those warriors and also those horses of Varuna’s sons 
(Mahodara) seeing them lying down deprived of their cars 
swiftly sent up a tremendous cheer. And destroyed by 
Mahodara, their cars and horses together with their fore- 
most charioteers, lay low on the earth. And then forsak- 
ing their cars, the sons of the high-souled Varuna, stationed 
in the sky, did not experience any pain* by virtue of their 
native power. And having stretched their bows they pierced 
Mahodara, and then, all together they greatly angered 
prevented Ravana. As the clouds, with a thousand torrents 
cleave a mountain, so they, with dreadful shafts, resembling 
thunderbolts and discharged off the bows, pierced him. 
Thereupon the Ten-necked (demon), excited with wrath like 
the fire of dessolution, pierced them to their very vitals 
with highly dreadful arrows. And stationed above, he 
showered on them variegated maces, Vallasf Patticas> saktis 
and huge Sataghnis. 
Thereupon with the arrows the infantry were greatly 
exhausted like unto young elephants six years old, fallen 
in mire. Beholding Varuna’s sons thus worn out and over- 
whelmed the highly powerful Ravana roared in delight 
like unto clouds. Thereupon emitting loud cries the 
Rakshaha, like unto a cloud, with a downpour of diverse 
shafts, destroyed the offspring of Varuna. Thereupon they 
were all defeated and fell dead on the ground and all their 
followers fled away from the field of battle to their homes. 
Ravana spoke unto them. — “ Do ye communicate this to 
Varuna.” Whereto his minister Prahasta replied unto 
Ravana saying — “O great king — Varuna’s sons are slain 
and the lord of waters, whom thou art inviting for battle, 
hath gone to the region of Brahma, to hear songs. While 
the king is away, what is the use of taking trouble, O hero ? 
And all these heroic sons (of Varuna) have been vanquished.” 
Hearing these words and spreading his own name the lord 
of Rakshasas expressing sign of joy, issued out of Varu- 
na’s abode. And returning by the way by which he had 
come, the Raksha, stationed in the welkin, proceeded towards 
Lanka.” 
again journeyed in the city of Asma (the followers of 
Ravana) dreadful in fight. There the Ten-necked demon beheld 
a highly picturesque house — adorned with networks of pearls, 
having gateways crested with Vaidurjas, golden pillars and 
abounding in pavements. And the stairs, of that picturesque 
house resembling the abode of Mahendra, covered with 
girdles, were made of crystal. Beholding that excellent house 
the highly powerful Ravana thought within himself — “Whose 
is this beautiful house, resembling the summit of Meru ? Go, 
O Prahasta, and learn quickly whose house is this. ” Thus 
ordered, Prahasta entered that excellent house — and finding 
none in one appartment he entered another and thus entering 
seven apartments he at last saw a flame of fire. There was 
a man in that flame, who, when seen, laughed aloud. Hearing 
that dreadful laughter Prahasta’s down stood on their end. 
There was another man in that flame, as if in a swoon, 
engarlanded with golden lotuses, incapable of being looked 
at, like the sun, and resembling the Yama’s self. Beholding 
that the night-ranger speedily issued out of the house and 
communicated it unto Ravana. Thereupon, O Rama, having 
descended from Pushpaka, the Ten-necked demon, black as 
collyrium, entered that house. (Immediately) obstructing the 
door there stood a huge-bodied man, dreadful like^ Siva — his 
tongue was all flame, his eyes were red, rows of teeth 
beautiful, lips like Bimba, his form was handsome, nose 
dreadful, neck like a shell marked with three lines, jaws 
were spacious, beards thick, bone fleshy, teeth huge and his 
appearance was all dreadful. And taking up an iron mace 
he stood at the gate. Beholding him, Da£anana's hairs 
stood on their end — his heart and body trembled. And 
seeing these bad omens, O Rama, he began to think within 
himself. He thus meditating that man said — ‘ What art 
thou thinking, O Rakshasa ? Tell me all in confidence. I 
shall confer upon thee the hospitality of lighting, O hero, 
O night-ranger.' Having said this he again spoke unto 
Ravana, saying — ‘ Dost thou wish to enter into conflict with 
Bali, or what else is thy intention?' Ravana was so over- 
whelmed that his hairs stood on their end ; but resorting to 
calmness he said — ‘ O thou foremost of those skilled in 
speech, who residest in this house ? I shall fight with him ; 
speak out what thou wishest.' He again said (to Ravana) — 
“The lord of Danavas lives here — he is highly generous, 
heroic, and hath truth for his prowess. He is gifted with 
many qualities, resplendent like unto Yama with mace 
in his hand or the newly risen sun and incapable 
of being defeated in conflict, impetuous, invincible, victorious, 
powerful, a veritable ocean of accomplishments, sweet-speech- 
ed, supporter of the dependants, fond of preceptor and 
Brahmans, always waiting for opportune hours, gifted with 
high powers, truthful, of a handsome person, skilful, gifted 
with all accomplishments, heroic and engaged in the study 
of the Vedas. He sometimes walks on foot and moves about 
like the wind — he shines like fire and spreads heat like the 
sun. He travels with the gods, spirits, serpents and birds. He 
does not know fear; dost thou wish to fight with him ? If thou 
dost wish to fight with Bali, O lord of Rakshasas, O thou gifted 
with great energy, do thou speedily enter (this house) and 
engage in the encounter.’ Being thus addressed the Ten- 
necked demon entered where Bali was. Beholding the lord 
of Lanka, the foremost of D&navas, resembling the flaming 
fire, and hard to look at like the sun, laughed. And taking 
that Rakshasa by the hand and placing him on his lap he 
said. c O Ten-necked lord of Rakshasas, O thou having 
long arms, what desire of thine may I satisfy ? Do thou tell 
me what for thou hast come hither.’ Being thus addressed by 
Bali Ravana said — ‘I have heard, O illustrious sir, that 
formerly thou wast bound by Vishnu. Forsooth I am cap- 
able of releasing thee from the bonds.’ Hearing that Bali 
laughed and said — ‘ Hear, I shall relate to thee what thou 
hast asked, O RSLvana. The red-hued man, who stands always 
at the door — by him formerly all the leading Danavas and 
other powerful lords were brought into subjection — by him 
I was also bound. He is invincible like unto death ; who is 
there on this earth that can deceive him ? He, who stands 
at the door, is the destroyer of all beings, creator and preser- 
ver and the lord of the three worlds. Thou dost not know 
him nor do I. He is identical with past, future and present 
and is the lord. He is Kali and he is Time — the destroyer 
of all beings. He is the destroyer and the creator of the 
three worlds — and he slays all beings mobile and immobile. 
And that lord of all gods again creates the universe without 
beginning or end. O night-ranger, he governs and preserves 
all sacrifices, gifts and oblations to fire. Forsooth he is the 
creator and the preserver of the universe — there is none so 
wonderful in the three worlds. O son of Pulasta, He hath 
been guiding the former Danavas, myself, yourself like so 
many beasts bound with ropes. Vitra, Danu, Suka, Sambhu, 
Nishumbha, Sumbha, Kilanemi, Prahlada and others, Kuta, 
Vairochana, Mridu, Jamala, Arjuna? Kansa, Kaitabha, and 
Madhu used to impart heat like the sun, appear resplendant 
like the rays, move about like air and pour showers like 
Indra. All of them celebrated many a sacrifice and were 
engaged in austere penances. All of them were high-souled 
and considered the practice of Yoga as a great virtue. 
Having got by an immense accession of wealth they enjoyed 
many pleasures, made many gifts, celebrated many sacrifices, 
studied (many lores) and governed their subjects. They were 
all protectors of their own kith and kin and. slayers of ene- 
mies ; and in battle, there was none equal to them in the 
three worlds. They were all heroic, of a high pedigree, versed 
in all sacred writings, proficient in all branches of learning and 
indomitable in warfare. Having defeated thousands of 
celestials in conflict, the high-souled ones conquered the 
regions. They were always engaged in those works which 
were not liked by the celestials and used to maintain their 
own men. They were all inflated with pride and haughtiness 
and effulgent like the newly-risen sun. The glorious Hari* 
the lord Vishnu, knoweth only how to bring about their 
destruction who perpetually assail the celestials. He creates 
all these and He, bringing about their destruction, 
existeth in Himself at the time of dissolution. These 
highly powerful and high-souled Danava chiefs, assum- 
ing shapes at will, have been destroyed by the glorious God. 
Besides, all these heroes, who have been heard of as being 
irrepressible and invincible in warfare, have been dis- 
comfitted by the wondrous power of Krita.nta.” Having 
said this the lord of Danavas again spoke unto the lord of 
Rakshsas — ‘O hero, O thou gifted with great strength, take 
that flaming discus which thou beholdest and come to my 
side. I shall then relate to thee the means of eternal 
liberation. Do what I have told thee, O thou having long 
arms. Delay not 0 Ravana.” Hearing this the highly 
powerful Raksha proceeded, laughing, O descendant of Raghu, 
where that celestial kundafa was. Ravana, proud of his prowess, 
easily took it up but could not move it by any means. And 
being ashamed that higly powerful one again attempted. 
As soon as it was uplifted the Rakshasa dropped down on 
ground, bathed in a pool of blood, like unto an uprooted 
Sala tree. In the meantime there arose a sound from Push- 
paka, and the councillors of that lord of Rakshasas cried 
aloud. Regaining his sense that Raksha rose up in a moment 
and lowered his head in shame. Bali said to him — “Do thou 
come, O foremost of Rakshasas and hear my words. O heroe, 
the kundala > crested with jewels, which thou didst assay to take 
up, is an ornament for the ear of one of *my forefathers. 
This fell here on the ground, O thou gifted with great 
strength ; another kundala was thrown on the summit 
of the mountain. Besides these kundalas his crown 
was also cast off on the groud before the altar during the 
encounter. Formerly none bore enmity towards my ancestor 
Hiranya Kasipu — Time death, or illness. He had no death 
during the day, night, evening or morning. O foremost 
of Rakshasas, he did not experience death from any 
w r eapon whatsoever. He created a dreadful enmity 
with Prahlada. This conflict having taken place with the 
high-souled and heroic Prahlada there rose up a dreadful figure 
of man-lion — a terror unto all, O foremost of Rakshasas. 
And that terrible figure casting his looks about, all the worlds 
were over-whelmed. 

Thereupon taking him up with his arms he destroyed 
him with his nails. The person, who is standing at the door, 
is this supreme Vasudeva, void of passion. I shall now 
relate to thee the words of that supreme God ; do thou 
hear, if thy heart is filled with spiritual thoughts. The 
person, who is standing at the door, hath brought into sub- 
jection, in thousands of years, a thousand of Indras, an 
